Machine Translated by Google

DECREE

PRESIDENT OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION

National Security Strategies

Russian Federation

In accordance with federal laws of December 28, 2010 No.

No. 390-FZ "On Security" and dated June 28, 2014 No. 172-FZ
Decree:

"on strategic planning

Russian Federation"

one. Approve the attached National Security Strategy

of the Russian Federation.

2. Recognize as invalid the Decree of the President of the Russian Federation of December 31, 2015 No. No. 683 "On the National Security Strategy of the Russian Federation" (Collected Legislation of the Russian Federation, 2016, No. 1, Art. 212).

3. This Decree shall enter into force from the date of its signing.

Russia

to

Resident of

the Russian Federation

V.Putin

feder,

(OFFICE

The president

*

Moscow, Kremlin
July 2, 2021 about 400

100052 97403 3




APPROVED by Decree

of the President of the

Russian Federation dated July

2, 2021 no 400

NATIONAL SECURITY OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION

STRATEGY OF

I. General provisions

one. Consistently pursued by the Russian Federation course strengthening the defense capability, the intemal unity of political

on the

stability, the modemization of the economy and the development of industrial potential ensured the strengthening of the sovereign statehood pursue an of Russia independent foreign and domestic policy, effectively resist attempts by extemal pressure.

capable of

country

how

The Constitution of the Russian Federation enshrines the fundamental

values and principles that form the foundations of Russian society, the security of the country, the further development of Russia as a legal social state, in which the observance and protection of the rights and freedoms of a citizen are of paramount importance,

and

well-being of the people, protection of the dignity

of citizens of the Russian Federation (hereinafter referred to as citizens). Only

harmonious combination of a strong power

and

of human well-being will ensure the formation of a just society prosperity actions to implement the strategic national priorities of the Russian Federation, aimed at neutralizing extemal and intemal threats and creating conditions for achieving national development goals. 2. This

Russia.

This requires coordinated

Strategy is

the basic document

of strategic planning that defines the national interests and strategic national priorities of the Russian Federation, the goals and objectives of the state policy in the field

and

on the




ensuring national security and sustainable development of the Russian Federation in the long term.

3. This Strategy is based on the inextricable relationship and interdependence of the national security of the Russian Federation and the socio-economic development of the country.

four. legal basis

of this Strategy are the Constitution

of the Russian Federation, federal laws of December 28, 2010 No. No. 390-FZ "On Security" and dated June 28, 2014 No 172-FZ "On Strategic Planning Federation", other federal laws, regulatory legal acts of the President

of the Russian Federation.

5. This Strategy uses the following key CONCEPTS:

1) national security of the Russian Federation (hereinafter

of the Russian

the state of protection of the

national security) national interests of the Russian Federation from extemal intemal threats, which ensures the implementation of the constitutional rights and freedoms of citizens, a decent quality and standard of living, civil peace and harmony in the country, the protection of the sovereignty of the Russian of state integrity, socio-economic development of the country;

Federation,

her

independence

and

2) the national interests of the Russian Federation - the objectively

significant needs of the individual, society, the state of security and sustainable development;

And

3) strategic national priorities of the Russian Federation (hereinafter

referred to as strategic national priorities), the most important

areas for ensuring national security and sustainable development

of the Russian Federation;

4) ensuring national security, implementation by

public authorities in cooperation with civil society institutions and organizations of political, legal, military,

socio-economic, informational, organizational

and other measures aimed at countering threats to national security;

5) a threat to national security - a set of conditions and

factors that create a direct

OR

indirect Possibility




causing damage to the national interests of the Russian Federation;

6) supply system

national security is

a set of public authorities implementing state policy in the field of ensuring national security and the tools at their disposal.

II. Russia in the Modem World: Trends and Opportunities

6. Modem world

Increasing the number of centers of global

going through a period of transformation.

Economic political

and

development, the strengthening of the positions of new global and regional leading countries lead to a change in the structure of the world

order, the formation of new architecture, rules and principles of the

world order.

7. The desire of Westem countries to maintain their hegemony,

the crisis of modem models and tools of economic development, the strengthening of disproportions in the development of states,

the increase in the level of social inequality, the desire of transnational corporations to limit the role of states are accompanied by an aggravation

of domestic political problems, an increase in interstate contradictions,

a weakening of the INFLUENCE of intemational institutions and a decrease in the effectiveness of the global security.

eight. The growing instability in the world, the growth

of radical and extremist sentiments may lead to attempts to resolve the growing interstate conflicts for intemal extemal enemies, destruction of the economy, traditional values and disregard for fundamental human rights and freedoms.

and

check

search

9. In the context of growing geopolitical tensions, the foreign

policy of the Russian Federation should contribute to increasing the stability of the system of intemational relations based on intemational law, the principles of universal, equal

and

indivisible security, deepening multilateral cooperation

without dividing lines and bloc approaches in order to jointly solve global and regional problems with




FROM

them

and

the central coordinating role of the United Nations (UN) and its Security Council. ten. Implementation

The Russian Federation's state policy in

the field of ensuring national security contributes to increasing intemal stability, building up the economic, political, military and spiritual potential of Russia, which is necessary to strengthen

its role as one of the influential centers of the modem world.

eleven. At present, the cohesion of Russian society is strengthening,

civic consciousness is being strengthened, awareness of the need to protect traditional spiritual and moral values is growing, the social activity of citizens is increasing, and involvement in

solving the most pressing problems of local and state importance.

12. State and public security, territorial integrity and sovereignty

of the country are ensured at the proper level, and the level

of terrorist activity has been significantly reduced. Consistent implementation of military policy ensures the protection of the Russian Federation from military dangers and military threats.
Attempts of extemal interference in the intemal affairs of the Russian Federation are effectively suppressed.

13. The Russian Federation demonstrated to the whole world economic stability proved the ability to withstand my extemal sanctions pressure. Work continues to reduce dependence on imports in key sectors of the economy.
The level of food and energy security has increased.

and

fourteen. To move the Russian Federation to a new level of

economic development and improve the quality of life of citizens, comprehensive measures are being taken to overcome negative demographic trends and solve systemic problems in the field of healthcare, to reduce poverty and the stratification of society by income level, and to improve the state of the environment. Development of scientific potential, improvement of quality

and

accessibility of education will accelerate the restructuring

of the Russian economy.

fifteen. In order to ensure and protect the national interests of the

Russian Federation from extemal and intemal threats, including




from unfriendly actions of foreign states, it is necessary to increase the efficiency of using the existing achievements and competitive advantages of the Russian Federation, taking into account long-term trends in world development.

16. In the conditions of stagnation and recession of the leading

economies of the world, the declining stability of the global monetary and financial system, the intensification of the struggle for access to markets and resources, the practice of using tools of unfair competition, protectionist measures and sanctions, including in the financial and trade spheres, is becoming more widespread. In order to obtain

advantages, a number of states are exerting open political and economic pressure on Russia and its partners. The increased attention of the world community to the problems of climate change and the preservation of a favorable environment is used as a pretext for restricting the access of Russian companies to export markets, curbing the development of Russian industry, establishing control over transport routes, and preventing Russia from developing the Arctic.

17. The growth of geopolitical instability and conflict, the

strengthening of interstate contradictions are accompanied by an

increase in the threat of the use of military force. The loosening

of the universally recognized norms of the principles of intemational

and

law, the weakening and destruction of existing intemational legal

institutions, the ongoing dismantling of the system of treaties

and agreements in the field of arms control lead to an increase

in tension and an aggravation of the military-political situation, including near the state border of the Russian Federation. Actions

and

aimed at inspiring

by some countries disintegration processes in the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) in order to destroy Russia's ties with its traditional allies. A number of states call Russia a threat and even a military adversary. There is a growing danger of armed conflicts escalating into local and regional wars, including those involving nuclear powers. Outer space and information space are being actively explored as new areas of military operations. eighteen. The

desire to isolate the Russian

the Russian Federation,

and

the use of double standards in intemational politics




on the

impede the effectiveness of multilateral cooperation in such important areas for the world community as ensuring equal and indivisible security for all states, including in Europe, conflict resolution, combating terrorism, extremism, drug trafficking, organized crime, the spread of infectious diseases, ensuring intemational information security , solving environmental problems.

19. The problem of moral leadership and the creation of an attractive ideological basis for the future world order is becoming more and more urgent. Against the backdrop of the crisis of the Westem liberal model, a number of states are making attempts to deliberately blur traditional values, distort world history, reconsider their views on the role and place of Russia in it, rehabilitate fascism, and incite ethnic and religious conflicts. Information campaigns are being carried out aimed at creating a hostile image of Russia. The use of the Russian language is limited, the activities of the Russian mass media are prohibited, the use of Russian information resources, sanctions are imposed towards Russian

and

athletes. The Russian Federation is unreasonably accused

of violating intemational obligations, carrying out computer

attacks, and interfering in the intemal affairs of foreign

states. Russian citizens and compatriots living abroad face

discrimination persecution.

and

open

twenty. Unfriendly

countries

They are trying to use

the existing socio-economic problems of the Russian

Federation to destroy its intemal unity, inspire and

radicalize the protest movement, and support marginal

and

groups split in Russian society. Increasingly, indirect methods are used to provoke long-term instability

within the Russian Federation.

21. Against the backdrop of the implementation of a targeted policy to contain the Russian Federation, the her independence, state and territorial integrity, protection of the

strengthening of

traditional spiritual and moral foundations of the Russian

sovereignty,




society, ensuring defense and security, preventing interference

in the intemal affairs of the Russian Federation.

22. The main factors determining the position and role

of the Russian Federation in the world in the long term are the high quality of human potential, the ability to provide

and

technological leadership, efficiency of public administration transfer of the Economy to a new technological basis. The state of science, innovation, industry, education, healthcare and culture is tuming into a key indicator of Russia's competitiveness. Entering the forefront in these areas will further strengthen the country's defense capability, achieve national development goals, and create conditions for raising the intemational prestige of the Russian Federation

cooperation with it for other states. Preservation of Russian identity,

culture, traditional Russian spiritual and moral values

and

attractiveness of

and patriotic education of citizens will contribute to the further development of the democratic structure of the Russian Federation and its openness to the world.

23. The formation of new architecture, rules and principles

of the world order is accompanied for the Russian Federation by the emergence of not only new challenges and threats, but also

additional opportunities. Prospects for long-term development of Russia's positioning in the world are determined by its intemal potential, the attractiveness of the system of values, the willingness and ability to realize its competitive advantages by improving the efficiency of public administration. 24. the Russian Federation

speaks

per

expansion of

equal multilateral cooperation, strengthening the development of universal intemational institutions in order to reduce global tension, strengthen intemational security, develop mechanisms for interaction

and harmonize the interests of different development centers, determine common approaches and rules of conduct in the economic and trade spheres. Rapprochement of positions and common responsibility for the future of the world will allow all states to get more opportunities

for

joint decision

global problems, Alignment of social

and




economic development of countries and regions of the planet, saving the moral and physical health of mankind.

III. National interests of the Russian Federation

and strategic national priorities

25. Taking into account the long-term trends in the development of the situation in the Russian Federation and in the world, its national
interests at the present stage are:

1) saving the people

Russia, development of human potential,

improvement of the quality of life and welfare of citizens;

2) protection of the constitutional order, sovereignty, independence,

state and territorial integrity of the Russian Federation, strengthening

the country's defense; 3) maintaining civil peace

and harmony

strengthening the rule of law, eradicating corruption, protecting citizens

and all forms of ownership from illegal encroachments, developing mechanisms

in the country,

for interaction between the state and civil society; 4) development

safe information space, protection of

Russian society from destructive information and psychological impact;

5) sustainable development of the Russian economy on a new

on the

technological basis;

6) environmental protection, conservation of natural resources,

and

rational use of natural resources, adaptation to climate change; to

7) strengthening traditional Russian spiritual and moral values, preserving the cultural and historical heritage of the people of Russia;

8) maintaining strategic stability, strengthening peace and security,

the legal foundations of intemational relations.

26. Ensuring and protecting the national interests of the Russian

Federation are carried out by concentrating the efforts and resources of public authorities, organizations and institutions of civil society on the implementation of the following strategic national priorities:
1) saving the

people of Russia

and

human development;




2) defense of the country; 3) state and public security; 4) information security; 5) economic security;
6) scientific and technological development; 7) environmental safety

and

rational use of

natural resources;

8) protection of traditional Russian spiritual and moral

values, culture and historical memory; stability

9) strategic

intemational cooperation.

IV. Ensuring national security

and

mutually beneficial

27. National

safety

is ensured by achieving

the goals and solving the tasks envisaged within the framework

of the strategic national priorities.

Saving the people of Russia and developing human potential

28. The people

is the bearer

and

Federation is its main asset. moral ideals and cultural and historical values, the talent of the people underlie statehood and are the foundation for the further development of the country.

sovereignty

The Russian spiritual and

29. The state socio-economic policy being implemented

in the Russian Federation is aimed at ensuring a decent life and free development of a person, creating conditions for improving the health of citizens, increasing life expectancy, reducing mortality, improving housing conditions and expanding opportunities for obtaining quality education.

thirty. Particular attention is paid to supporting the family, motherhood,

fatherhood and childhood, the disabled and the elderly, raising children,

them

comprehensive spiritual, moral, intellectual

and physical development. Conditions for a decent life for the older generation are being actively formed. Increasing the birth rate is becoming a prerequisite for increasing the population of Russia.




ten

31. Further development of human potential should be ensured

by measures aimed at a steady increase in the income and well-being of Russian citizens, the creation of a comfortable and safe environment for living, the formation of a healthy lifestyle, the unconditional implementation of the entire territory of the country of constitutional rights and guarantees in the areas of healthcare, sanitary and epidemiological welfare of the population, social security, education and culture.

on the

32. The goals of state policy in the field of saving the people and development of human potential are sustainable

of Russia natural growth in the number and improvement of the quality of life of the population, strengthening the health of citizens, reducing poverty, reducing the level of social property inequality, raising

and

the level of education of the population, raising a harmoniously developed and socially responsible citizen.

33. Achieving the goals of state policy in the field of saving the people of Russia and developing human potential is ensured
by solving the following tasks:

1) an increase in the real incomes of the population, a reduction in the number

of low-income citizens, a decrease in the level of inequality of citizens depending on their incomes;

2) improving the quality of social services and their accessibility

for all citizens, creating conditions for active participation in the life of society of persons with disabilities and persons of older age groups;

3) increase in the birth rate, the formation of motivation for having

to

many children;

4) increase in life expectancy, decrease in mortality

and the level of disability of the population, prevention of occupational diseases;

5) improving the quality and accessibility of medical care,

including vaccination, and drug provision;

6) ensuring the sustainability of the healthcare system, its

adaptation to new challenges and threats, including those associated with the spread of infectious diseases, the creation of reserves

of medicines and medical devices;

7) increasing the motivation of citizens to lead a healthy lifestyle,

engage in physical culture and sports;




eleven

8) development of a biological risk monitoring system

to prevent and respond to biological threats;

9) ensuring the sanitary and epidemiological well-being of

the population, developing a system of social and hygienic monitoring;

10) increasing the physical and economic accessibility

of safe and high-quality food products;

11) identification and development of abilities and talents in children

and youth;

12) improving the quality of general education;
13) providing citizens with ample opportunities to receive

secondary and higher vocational education, vocational training and retraining throughout life in accordance with the needs of the labor market;

14) education and upbringing of children and

basis

youth on traditional Russian spiritual and moral cultural and historical values;

and

15) development of the sphere of culture, increasing the availability

of cultural benefits for citizens;

16) improving the living conditions of citizens, increasing the availability

and quality of housing, developing housing and communal infrastructure;

17) creation of a comfortable environment for living

all

in settlements, development of their transport and energy infrastructure.

Defense of the country

34. The military-political situation in the world is characterized by

the formation of new global and regional centers of power, the intensification of the struggle between them for spheres of influence. Increasing the importance of military force as a tool for the subjects of intemational relations to achieve their geopolitical goals.

35. Strengthening the military dangers and military threats

to the Russian Federation is facilitated by attempts to put pressure

on Russia, its allies and partners, build up the military infrastructure of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization near Russian borders,

intensify intelligence activities, work out




12

the use of large formations and nuclear weapons against the Russian Federation. 36. Against the background

of developing the capacity of

the global

defense systems United States of America (USA) pursues

Military

missile

a consistent course obligations in the field of arms control. The planned deployment of US intermediate and shorter range missiles in Europe and the Asia-Pacific region poses a threat to strategic stability and intemational security.

from intemational

on the

refusal

37. Tensions continue to escalate in conflict zones in the

post-Soviet space, the Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan and the Korean Peninsula. The weakening of the systems of global and regional security creates conditions for the spread of intemational terrorism and extremism.

38. To prepare for the armed defense and armed defense of the

Russian Federation, the integrity and inviolability of its territory, the defense of the country is organized.

39. The goals of the country's defense are to create conditions for

the peaceful socio-economic development of the Russian Federation and to ensure its military security.

40. Achievement of the goals of the country's defense is carried out

within the framework of the implementation of military policy by strategic deterrence and prevention of military conflicts, improvement of the military organization of the state, forms of employment and methods of action of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation (hereinafter referred to as the Armed Forces), other troops, military formations and bodies, increasing mobilization readiness Russian Federation and readiness of forces and means of civil defense. At the same time, special attention is paid to solving the
following problems:

1) timely identification of existing and prospective military

dangers and military threats;

2) improvement of the military planning system of

the Russian Federation, development and implementation of interrelated political, military, military-technical, diplomatic, economic, information and other measures aimed at preventing the use of military force against Russia, protecting its sovereignty and territorial integrity;




13

3) maintaining a sufficient level of nuclear deterrence

potential;

4) ensuring a given degree of readiness for the combat

use of the Armed Forces, formations and bodies;

other troops,

Military

5) protection of national interests and citizens of the

Russian Federation outside its territory;

6) balanced

development of the Components of

the military organization, building up the defense potential, equipping the Armed Forces, other troops, military formations and bodies with modem weapons, military and special equipment;

7) improving the planning of measures to ensure

mobilization training

and

mobilization of the Russian Federation

and their implementation in the required volume, timely updating

and

maintenance at a sufficient level of the military-technical

potential of the military organization of the state;

8) timely consideration of trends in the changing nature of modem

wars and armed conflicts, creation of conditions for the most complete realization of the combat capabilities of troops (forces), development of requirements for promising formations and new means of armed struggle;

9) ensuring the technological independence of the military-industrial complex of the Russian Federation, innovative development, maintaining leadership in the development and production of new (promising) models (complexes, systems) of weapons, military and special equipment;

its

10) preparation of the economy of the Russian Federation, the economy of the constituent entities of the Russian Federation and the economy of municipalities, the preparation of state authorities, local govemments and organizations, the Armed Forces, other troops, military formations and bodies to ensure the protection of the state of armed attack to meet the needs of the state and the needs of the population in war time;

from

and

11) planning and conducting activities to prepare for defense

and

By

protection of the population, material and cultural

values on the territory of the Russian Federation from the dangers arising from military conflicts or as a result of these conflicts;




fourteen

12) maintenance at a high level of the moral, political and psychological state of the personnel, law and order and military discipline in the Armed Forces, other troops, military formations and bodies;

13) military-patriotic education and preparation for military

service of citizens;

14) Increasing the level of social

members of their families, citizens discharged from military service, as well

as improving the conditions of military service.

State and Public Security of servicemen,

41. Providing state

and

public security

is promoted by the implementation of measures aimed at strengthening the role of the state as a guarantor of the security of the individual and property rights, increasing the efficiency of law enforcement agencies and special services to protect the foundations of the constitutional order of the Russian Federation, the rights and freedoms of man and citizen, improving the unified state systems

crime prevention, ensuring the implementation of the principle

of the inevitability of punishment for the commission of a crime, as well as the formation in society of an atmosphere of intolerance towards illegal activities.

42. Despite the measures taken, the level of crime in certain

areas remains high in the Russian Federation. A large number of crimes are committed against property, in the use of water biological and forest resources, in the sphere of housing and communal services, as well as in the credit and financial sphere.
The number of crimes committed with the use of information and communication technologies is growing. destabilizing

Influence

on the

extremist

manifestations have a socio-political situation.

43. Threats remain associated with the occurrence of

With

natural and man-made emergencies, including those due to climate change, forest fires, floods and floods, depreciation of engineering and technical transport infrastructure, the introduction and spread of dangerous infectious diseases.

and




fifteen

44. Destructive forces abroad and within the country

are attempting to use the objective socio-economic

difficulties of the Russian Federation in order to stimulate

negative social processes, exacerbate interethnic

and

interfaith conflicts, manipulation

of the information sphere. The activity of intelligence and other activities of special services and organizations of foreign states is not weakening, including

With

using controlled Russian public associations them

and individuals. Intemational terrorist and extremist organizations are striving to intensify propaganda and recruitment of Russian citizens, the creation of their secret cells in Russia, and the involvement of Russian youth in illegal activities. Global Intemet companies are widely used to spread false information and organize illegal public events. 45. Against the backdrop of persistent

Russian Federation of

socio-economic problems, the need of society to increase

public administration, ensuring

efficiency is growing social justice, strengthening the fight against corruption and misuse of budgetary funds and state property, conducting a personnel policy not subject to the influence of group and related interests in public authorities and organizations with state participation.

46. The goals of ensuring state and public security

are to protect the constitutional order of the Russian Federation, to ensure state and territorial integrity, protection of fundamental rights and freedoms of man and citizen, strengthening of civil peace and harmony, political and social stability in society, improvement

her

sovereignty, independence,

mechanisms

interaction between the state

and civil society, strengthening law and order, eradicating corruption, protecting citizens and all forms of ownership, traditional Russian spiritual and moral values FROM unlawful encroachments, protecting the population and territories from natural and man-made emergencies.




16

of security goals

state public security

and

47. Achievement

is carried out through the implementation of state policy aimed at solving the following tasks:

1) prevention of interference in the intemal affairs of the Russian

Federation, suppression of intelligence and other activities of special services, organizations of foreign states, as well as individual

persons,

damaging the national interests of the Russian

Federation, other criminal encroachments on the foundations of the constitutional order of the Russian Federation, the rights and freedoms of man and citizen, including by inspiring "color revolutions";

2) ensuring the security of socio-political events held

on the

on the territory of the Russian Federation

and

OTHER

events;

3) ensuring the protection and protection of the state border

of the Russian Federation, the protection of the territorial sea,

the exclusive economic zone and the continental shelf of the a

Russian Federation, as well as the modemization of border infrastructure,

the improvement of mechanisms for border, customs, sanitary

and epidemiological other types of control;

4) increasing the confidence of citizens in the law enforcement

and judicial systems of the Russian Federation, improving the system of public control, mechanisms for the participation of

citizens and organizations in ensuring state public security;

and

5) development of civil society institutions, support for

socially significant initiatives, development of interaction between

civil society institutions

and

population with public

authorities in resolving issues that may cause an increase in social tension;

6) increasing the level of anti-terrorist protection of

places of mass stay of people, life support facilities for the population, organizations of the military-industrial, nuclear power industry, nuclear weapons, chemical, fuel and energy complexes of the country,

objects




17

transport infrastructure, other critically potentially hazardous facilities;

7) prevention of suppression of terrorist extremist

and

activities of organizations and individuals, attempts to commit acts of nuclear, chemical and biological terrorism;

important

and

8) reducing the level of criminalization of public relations, development state system of crime prevention;

unified

9) prevention of manifestations of radicalism, prevention of extremist and other criminal manifestations, primarily among minors and youth;

10) reducing the level of crime in the economic sphere, including

in the credit and financial sphere, as well as in the areas of housing and communal services, the use of land, forest, water and water biological resources;

11) prevention of the suppression of offenses of crimes

and

committed with the use of information and communication technologies, including the legalization of criminal proceeds, the financing of terrorism, the organization of the illegal distribution of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, as well as the use of digital currencies for illegal purposes;

12) implementation of the principle of inevitability of punishment

for committing a crime;

and

per

13) prevention and suppression of crimes of corruption, misuse and embezzlement of budgetary funds by public authorities with state participation, of national projects (programs) and the implementation of the state defense order, and compensation for damage caused by such crimes,

tom

and

a

also

organizations

Number in the implementation

and increasing the level of responsibility for their commission;

14) improving the institution of responsibility of officials for actions (inaction) that led to inefficient use of budgetary funds and failure to achieve socially significant results of national development;




eighteen

15) detection of suppression of crimes related to illegal

and

circulation of weapons, ammunition, explosives, as well as narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances precursors;

With

and

THEM

16) combating illegal migration, strengthening control

over migration flows, social and cultural adaptation and integration of migrants; 17) waming

and

neutralization of social,

and

interfaith manifestations, prevention of the spread of religious radicalism, destructive religious movements, the formation of ethnic and religious enclaves, social and ethno-cultural isolation of certain groups of citizens;

interethnic conflicts, separatist

18) improving road safety;
19) increasing the effectiveness of measures to

prevent and eliminate natural and man-made emergencies;

20) ensuring the protection of the population from dangerous infectious

diseases that can cause an emergency situation in the field of sanitary and epidemiological welfare of the population;

21) forecasting the impact of the consequences of climate change

on the state of hazardous production facilities, hydraulic structures, the transport complex, life support facilities for the population;

22) Comprehensive development of law enforcement agencies, special services, fire departments and emergency rescue teams in accordance with the tasks they solve, Increasing the level of

technical

THEM

equipment,

strengthening social security improving the system of professional training of specialists in the field security;

of

23) ensuring legal protection of Russian citizens and

them

employees,

state public

and

legal entities and intemational (interstate) courts.

OT

politically biased decisions of foreign




19

Information Security

48. Rapid

the development of information and communication

technologies is accompanied by an increase in the likelihood of threats to the security of citizens, society and the state. 49. Expanding

usage

information and

communication technologies to interfere in the intemal affairs of states, undermine territorial integrity, which peace and security.

sovereignty violation of

THEM

And

poses a threat to intemational

fifty. The number of computer attacks on Russian

information resources is increasing. Most of these attacks are carried out from the territories of foreign countries.

The initiatives of the Russian Federation in the field of ensuring intemational information security are opposed by foreign states seeking to dominate the global information space.

51. The activities of special services of foreign states

on the

CO

are being stepped up to conduct intelligence and other operations in the Russian information space. The armed forces of such states are practicing actions to decommission the critical information infrastructure of the Russian Federation.
52. in B

FROM

AT

purposes

destabilization of the socio-political situation

in the Russian Federation, false information is being disseminated,

including deliberately false reports about the threat of committing

acts.

Information and

terrorist telecommunications network "Intemet" (hereinafter referred to as the "Intemet") contains materials of terrorist extremist organizations, calls for riots, extremist activities, participation in mass (public) events held in violation of the established order, committing suicide, propaganda of a criminal image is carried out life, consumption of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, is placed

and

The main object of such destructive influence is the youth.

Other

illegal information.




twenty

53. The desire of transnational corporations to consolidate their monopoly position on the Intemet and control all information

resources is accompanied by the introduction by corporations

(in the absence of legal grounds and contrary to intemational

law) of censorship Intemet platforms. For political reasons, users of the Intemet

are forced to take a distorted view of historical facts, as well

as events taking place in the Russian Federation and in the world.

such

and

blocking altemative

54. Anonymity, which is ensured through the use of information

and communication technologies, facilitates the commission of crimes, expands opportunities for the legalization of proceeds

from crime, the financing of terrorism, the distribution of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances.

and

55. Use of foreign information technologies in

the Russian Federation increases the vulnerability of Russian information resources,

and

telecommunications equipment

including objects of the critical information infrastructure of the Russian Federation, abroad.

influence from

56. The purpose of ensuring information security is to strengthen

the sovereignty of the Russian Federation in the information space.

57. Achieving the goal of ensuring information security

is carried out through the implementation of state policy

aimed at solving the following tasks:

1) formation of a safe environment for the circulation of

reliable information, Increasing the security of the information infrastructure of the Russian Federation and the stability of its functioning;

And

2) development of a forecasting system, detection of prevention

her

and

of threats to the information security of the Russian Federation, identification of their sources, prompt elimination of the consequences of the implementation of such threats;

3) prevention of destructive information and technical

impact on Russian information resources,




21

including objects of critical information infrastructure of the Russian Federation;

4) creation of conditions for effective prevention, detection

and suppression of crimes and other offenses committed with the use of information and communication technologies;
5) increased

security

and

the stability of

the functioning of the unified telecommunication network of the Russian

Federation, the Russian segment of the Intemet network, other significant objects of the information and communication infrastructure, the prevention of foreign control over their functioning;

6) reducing to the minimum possible level the number of

leaks of restricted information and personal data, as well as reducing the number of violations of the requirements established by Russian law for the protection of such information and personal data;

also

7) prevention and (or) minimization of damage to national

the implementation by foreign

security associated states of technical intelligence; 8) ensuring the protection of constitutional rights

With

and freedoms

of man and citizen in the processing of personal data, including with the use of information technology;

9) strengthening the information security of the Armed Forces,

other troops, military formations and bodies, as well as developers and manufacturers of weapons, military and special equipment;

10) development of forces and means of information confrontation;
11) countering the use of the information infrastructure

of the Russian Federation by extremist terrorist organizations, special services, propaganda structures of foreign states TO carry out a destructive information impact on citizens and society: 12) improving the means of methods

and

ensuring

information security based on the use of advanced technologies,

including artificial intelligence technologies Quantum computing;

and

and




22

13) security

priority use of the information

infrastructure of the Russian Federation of Russian information technology equipment that meets the requirements of information security, implementing national projects (programs) and solving problems in the field of digitalization of the economy and public administration;

and

tom

number

when

14) strengthening cooperation of the Russian Federation

with foreign partners in the field of information security, including in order to establish an intemational legal regime for ensuring security in the field of the use of information and communication technologies;

15) bringing to the Russian and intemational public reliable information about the domestic and foreign policy of the Russian Federation;

16) development of interaction between public authorities,

institutions of civil society organizations in the implementation of activities in the field of ensuring information security of the Russian Federation.

And

economic security

58. The world economy is in a deep recession. Are getting

stronger

market volatility, the instability of the intemational

financial system, the gap between the real and virtual economy is widening. While the high economic interdependence of the countries of the regions of the world persists, the processes of

and

formation of new intemational production and supply chains are slowing down, and investment flows are declining. The role of national states of regional agreements in the trade and economic sphere is growing. 59.

The transition to sustainable development is hampered

to

by the accumulated socio-economic problems, disproportions in the development of countries, the inefficiency of previously used tools to stimulate the economic

activity. The

and

uncertainty of the prospects for the world economy is increasing

due to the weakening of the system of regulation of intemational

economic relations, the politicization of issues of economic cooperation,

the lack of mutual trust between states,




23

the use of unilateral restrictive measures (sanctions) and the growth of protectionism.

60. in the context of the ongoing structural restructuring of the

With

Everything

world economy, associated with a change in the technological foundation human potential and ecology are of its development, becoming more important. The transformation of traditional markets for goods, capital, technology and labor, the emergence of new sectors of the economy are accompanied by a redistribution of the roles of the potential of individual countries in the regions of the world, the formation of new centers of economic influence. 61. vast

and

territory

and

Favorable geographical

location, variety of natural and climatic conditions of mineral resources, scientific and technological educational potential, macroeconomic stability, domestic political stability, a high level of national defense and state security are factors that create favorable conditions for the modemization of the Russian economy, the development of the industrial potential of Russia.

and

62. The transition from the export of primary raw materials

and agricultural products to their deep processing, the development of existing and the creation of new high-tech industries and markets, along with the technological renewal of the basic sectors of the economy, the use of low-carbon technologies, will lead to a change in the structure of the Russian economy, increasing its competitiveness and sustainability.

63. The implementation of large-scale investment and innovation

and

programs of projects that contribute to the consolidation of the scientific, technical, production and resource potential of Russia, the saturation of the domestic market with Russian-made goods and the emergence of new advanced scientific competencies create the basis for the long-term economic development of the Russian Federation and the further strengthening of national security.

64. For the successful implementation of the Structural Transformation

of the Russian economy, it is necessary to take measures aimed at eliminating imbalances in the economy and territorial development of the Russian Federation, overcoming infrastructural constraints, forming an independent financial and banking system, developing innovative activities,

increase




24

competitive advantages of the Russian Federation, increasing

the efficiency of strategic management of the economic development

of the Russian Federation and state regulation of the Economy.

65. important

the conditions for ensuring the economic security of the Russian Federation are reliance on the intemal potential

of the country, independent solution of the tasks facing Russia while maintaining openness FOR mutually beneficial cooperation

ties with world development centers will also increase the stability of the Russian economy. 66. The goals

other countries. Building diversified

of providing

economic

The security of

the Russian Federation is the strengthening of the economic sovereignty

of the country, increasing the competitiveness of the Russian economy and its resistance to the impact of extemal and intemal threats, creating

conditions for the economic growth of the Russian Federation, the pace

of which will be higher than the world.

67. Achieving the goals of ensuring the economic security of

the Russian Federation is carried out by solving the following tasks:

1) ensuring the institutional and structural restructuring of

the national economy on a modem technological basis, its development

and

on the

basis

use of low-diversification carbon technologies;

2) maintaining macroeconomic stability, maintaining inflation

at a consistently low level, ensuring the stability of the ruble and the balance of the budget system;

3) increasing solvent domestic demand for goods

and services, balancing the growth of lending to individuals, limiting the risks associated with an increased debt burden on them;

4) ensuring the acceleration of the growth rate of investments in

fixed capital, the availability of long-term loans, the protection and encouragement

of capital investments, and the stimulation of the use of intemal sources

of investment;

5) ensuring the sustainable development of the real sector

of the economy, the creation of high-tech industries,

new




25

sectors of the economy, markets for goods and services of promising high technologies;

and

6) increasing labor productivity through the modemization

of industrial enterprises and infrastructure, digitalization, the use of artificial intelligence technologies, and the creation of high-tech jobs;

on the

basis

7) overcoming the critical dependence of the Russian economy

on the import of technologies, equipment and components through the accelerated introduction of advanced Russian technological developments, localization of production in Russia; 8) strengthening the achievements

leading positions and competitive advantages in aviation, shipbuilding, rocket and space building, nuclear power industry, as well as in the field of information and communication technologies;

industry, engine

Russian Federation of

9) intensive technological renewal of the basic sectors

of the economy (industry, construction, communications, energy, agriculture, mining), the accelerated development of Russian engineering, including instrumentation and machine tools, the priority use of domestic products in solving the problems of modemizing the economy;

10) development of the radio-electronic industry, production

of information technologies and equipment necessary for solving problems public administration; eleven)

areas of digitalization Economics of

modemization of the production base of organizations

of the military-industrial complex, an increase in the volume of high-tech civilian and dual-use products manufactured by them;

12) expanding the production of medicines for

medical devices;

13) development and production of domestic vaccines

against topical infectious diseases;

14) overcoming the critical dependence on imports in the

field of breeding, breeding, aquaculture seed production (fish farming);

and

15) ensuring the energy security of the Russian Federation,

And

tom

including

sustainable

warm-and




26

energy supply of the population and subjects of the national economy,

Increasing the energy efficiency of the Economy of the efficiency of public administration in the field of the fuel and energy complex;
16) development

technologies

obtaining electricity from

renewable and altemative energy sources, developing low-carbon energy;

and

From

17) strengthening the financial system of the Russian Federation and sovereignty, developing the national

her

infrastructure of

tom

financial markets, including payment infrastructure, overcoming dependence in this area on third countries, expanding the practice of settlements with foreign partners in national currencies, reducing the withdrawal of financial assets abroad, counteracting illegal financial transactions; 18) Reducing the use of

the dollar

carrying out foreign economic activity;

USA

when

19) development of market, energy, engineering, innovation

and social infrastructures in order to accelerate the growth of the Russian economy; 20)

security

development of efficient transport infrastructure

and transport connectivity of the country; 21)

strengthening the unity of the economic space of the Russian

Federation, developing cooperation and economic ties between the constituent entities of the Russian Federation;

22) reducing the differentiation of the constituent entities of the Russian

Federation in terms of the level and pace of socio-economic development, quality stimulating the development of the economic potential

life,

of the regions, strengthening their budgetary security;

23)

Increasing the efficiency of the state macroeconomic

politicians

by developing a strategic planning

system, introducing a risk-based approach, taking into account

potential extemal and intemal challenges and threats to the economic

security of the Russian Federation;

24) improvement of the system of state control (supervision)

in the sphere of economic activity;

25) improving the system of resettlement and placement of

productive people on the territory of the Russian Federation, overcoming the trend of concentration of economic entities

forces




27

activities and population in metropolitan agglomerations, ensuring the socio-economic development of small and medium-sized cities, as well as rural areas; 26) creation

on the

favorable business environment on the

territory of the Russian Federation, increasing the attractiveness of the Russian jurisdiction for Russian and foreign investors, deoffshorization of the economy;

27) improving the mechanisms of interaction between the state and business, promoting the development of small medium-and

sized businesses, primarily in the manufacturing and scientific and technological sectors;

28) elimination of disproportions in the labor market, shortage

of engineers and workers, reduction of informal employment, legalization of labor relations, increase in the level of professional training of specialists, establishment of the principle of priority employment of Russian citizens;

29) involvement in the labor activity of workers

released including those living in single-industry towns;

CONTACTS

AT

With

automation of production processes,

30) reducing the share of the shadow criminal sectors of the economy,

and

as well as the level of corruption in the business environment;

31) support, development and protection of competition in the

Russian market, suppression of monopolistic anti-competitive agreements, ensuring equal conditions and freedom of economic activity on the territory of the Russian Federation;

activities of

and

32) increasing the efficiency of using budgetary funds for managing state-owned assets, maintaining the property of enterprises and other organizations of strategic importance, including blocks of shares, in the ownership of the Russian Federation;

33) strengthening control over foreign investments in strategically

important sectors of the Russian economy;

34) creation of strategic reserves of mineral resources

sufficient to guarantee the mobilization needs of the Russian Federation and the needs of the country's economy in the long term;




28

35) development of intemational business contacts, expansion

of sales markets for Russian products, counteraction to attempts by foreign states to regulate key world markets for Russian exports.

Scientific and technological development

68. In the context of the transition of the global economy

on the

new

technological basis leadership in the development of science and technology becomes one and ensuring national security. The acceleration of scientific

key factors in increasing competitiveness

FROM

and technological progress affects all spheres of human life and is reflected in its quality.

on the

69. Technological changes increase the importance of

innovation in achieving high rates of socio-economic development

and ensuring effective public corporate govemance. 70. Introduction

And

of new

technologies

accompanied by the

transformation of mechanisms for the production of consumption, the emergence of new markets for goods and services, a change in the appearance of existing sectors of the economy and technological standards, an increase in the level of processing of natural resources, and a decrease in the energy intensity of the world economy.

And

71. New professions appear and become in demand, the

and

requirements for the level of education and qualifications of workers are growing. Interstate competition for attracting scientists

and highly qualified specialists is intensifying.

72. The emergence of new technologies contributes to the creation of weapons, military and special equipment, security systems with previously unattainable characteristics.

Power rivalry between countries is transferred to new environments.

73. Significant potential of the Russian Federation in the field

and

of fundamental system of scientific and educational centers, advantages in a number of technologies create conditions for the accelerated technological development of the country.

applied research, the presence of an extensive




29

74. To ensure sustainable growth and increase the competitiveness of the Russian economy, state stimulation of scientific, scientific, technical and innovative

and

activities, increasing the volume of private investment in

the development of such activities and the accelerated implementation of their

results in production. fifteen. The

and technological development

The Russian Federation is to ensure the technological independence and competitiveness of the country, the achievement of national development goals and the implementation of strategic national priorities.

goal of scientific

and

76. Achievement of the goal of scientific and technological development

of the Russian Federation is carried out by solving the following tasks:

1) development and implementation at the federal, regional,

sectoral and corporate levels of an agreed policy that ensures the transition of

the Russian Economy

on the

new

technological basis;

2) bringing the level of expenditures of the Russian Federation on the development of science and technology to the level of expenditures for such

purposes by the states that occupy leading positions in this area;

3) creation of a unified state system for managing scientific,

scientific, technical and innovative activities;

and 4) creating conditions for incentives to increase the interest

of Russian business in the development of scientific, scientific,

technical and innovative activities;

5) accelerated introduction of scientific research results into

industrial production to ensure a full scientific and production

cycle in accordance with the priorities of the socio-economic,

scientific, scientific and technological development of the Russian

and

Federation;

6) improvement of the system of fundamental scientific research

as an essential component of the sustainable development of the Russian Federation;

7) modemization and development of scientific, scientific, technical

and innovation infrastructure; 8)

update

material and technical base of scientific organizations

and educational organizations of higher education, including instrumentation and experimental testing;




thirty

9) creation and development on the territory of the Russian Federation of

networks

scientific

installations of the "megascience" class, large

research infrastructures, centers for the collective use of scientific and technological

equipment,

pilot production and engineering;

10) attracting world-class scientists and young talented

researchers to work in Russia, creating and developing

Russian Federation of Centers for Intemational Cooperation

in Science and Technology;

11) development of a system for the selection, training and targeted support of young Russian scientists and specialists in the field of scientific, scientific, technical and innovative activities;

12) creation of a national system for assessing the effectiveness

of scientific, scientific, technical and innovative activities;

13) achievement by Russia of leading positions in the field of

physical and mathematical, chemical, biological, medical, pharmaceutical and technical sciences; 14) development

of

promising

(nanotechnology, robotics, medical,

High

technologies

biological, genetic

engineering, information and communication, quantum,

artificial intelligence, large processing energy, laser, additive, creation of new materials, cognitive, nature-like technologies), supercomputer systems;

15) development of interdisciplinary research; 16)

data,

strengthening interaction between

research organizations creating conditions for the active commercialization of scientific and scientific and technical developments;

and

industrial enterprises,

17) conducting scientific and scientific-technical research in the

interests of the country's defense and state security;

18) activation of scientific research in the field of providing

biological,

radiation chemical safety of the Russian Federation;

and

19) ensuring the transfer

of technology knowledge

the defense and civilian sectors of the economy;

20) development of Instruments for the protection of intellectual

property, expansion of the practice of patent enforcement

and

between




31

legislation, countering the illegal transfer of Russian technologies and developments abroad;

for scientific research and testing;
21) development of production in the

Russian Federation of equipment

22) formation of domestic demand for Russian science-intensive and innovative products, primarily from govemment customers, state-owned companies and companies with state participation;

on the

23) training of scientific and scientific-pedagogical personnel,

highly qualified specialists

of scientific and technological development Federation;

By

priority areas Russian

24) development of a system of secondary vocational

education in order to train skilled workers and mid-level specialists

accordance with modem world standards.

With

Environmental safety and rational

nature management

77. In recent decades, the intensive growth of production and consumption

in the world has been accompanied by an increase in the anthropogenic load

on the environment and the deterioration of its condition, which entails a significant

change in the conditions of life on Earth.

78. Predatory use of natural resources leads to land degradation

and reduced soil fertility, scarcity of water resources, deterioration of marine ecosystems, and a decrease in landscape biological diversity. The pollution of the environment is increasing, which

and

entails a decrease in the quality of human life. Many countries are experiencing a shortage of natural resources.

79. Climate change has an increasingly negative impact

on the conditions for doing business and the state of the human environment. Increasing frequency of natural hazards

And

processes that become sources

of natural and man-made emergencies.




32

and

80. The development of a "green" low-carbon economy

and

is becoming a top issue on the intemational agenda. Increasing competition for access to natural resources is one

FROM

factors of increasing intemational tension, the

emergence of conflicts between states.

81. The Russian Federation considers its territory, its landscape

and biological diversity, unique ecological and resource potential as a national treasure, the preservation and protection of which is necessary to ensure the life of future generations, the harmonious development of man and the realization of the right of citizens to a favorable environment. Preservation of the quality of atmospheric air and water that meets environmental standards, reclamation of disturbed lands, ecological rehabilitation of territories and water bodies, an increase in the area of reforestation, and the elimination of accumulated environmental damage are mandatory conditions for improving the quality of life in the Russian Federation. 82. The objectives of ensuring environmental

The security

and

of rational nature management is to ensure the quality of the environment necessary for a favorable human life, conservation Restoration of the natural environment, balanced nature management, and mitigation of the negative effects of climate change.

and

83. Achieving the goals of ensuring environmental safety

and

rational nature management is carried out through the

implementation of state policy aimed at solving the following
tasks:

1) ensuring environmentally oriented economic growth,

stimulating the introduction of innovative technologies, developing environmentally friendly industries;

2) ensuring the rational and efficient use of natural resources,

the development of the mineral resource base;

3) reduction of the level of atmospheric air pollution

in cities and other settlements;

4) formation of a system of state regulation of greenhouse gas emissions, ensuring the implementation of projects to reduce greenhouse gas emissions

gases

And

increased

absorption;

THEM




33

5) development of facilities and technologies for cleaning emissions

ensuring

into the atmosphere, industrial and municipal wastewater; 6)

improve efficiency

hydrometeorological safety;

7) prevention of pollution of surface and ground waters,

improvement of water quality in polluted water bodies, restoration of water ecosystems;

8) reduction in the volume of generation of production and consumption waste, development of the industry for their disposal and reuse;

9) prevention of land degradation and reduction of soil fertility,

reclamation of disturbed lands, elimination of accumulated environmental damage, ecological rehabilitation of territories; 10) save

biological diversity of natural ecosystems

and development of a system of specially protected natural areas, protection and reproduction of forests, as well as objects of the animal world, including aquatic biological resources;

11) Pollution prevention

environment brought from the territories of other states by pollutants (in 12) solution

including

tom

radioactive substances) microorganisms;

and

natural resources of the Arctic zone of the Russian Federation;

Environmental problems rational use of

and

13) increasing the efficiency of state environmental

supervision, industrial public control in the field of

and

environmental protection;

14) development of a system of state environmental monitoring

and control over compliance with environmental standards

and

environmental requirements by economic entities, increasing the efficiency of predicting hazardous natural phenomena and processes, the consequences of the impact of climate change on the conditions of economic management and human life;

15) development of a biological risk monitoring system

to prevent and respond to biological threats;

16) increasing the technical potential and equipment of

the forces involved in the prevention and elimination of




34

negative environmental consequences of natural and man-made emergencies; 17)

Increasing the level of environmental

and

culture of citizens, education of citizens of a responsible

education attitude to the natural environment, stimulation of the population of public in environmental activities;

and

organizations to participate

to

18) development of intemational cooperation in the field of environmental

protection, including for the purpose of reducing environmental risks in the border areas of the Russian Federation.

Protection of traditional Russian spiritual and moral

values, culture and historical memory

84. The changes taking place in the modem world affect

not only interstate relations, but also universal values. Having reached a high level of socio-economic and technological development, humanity is faced with the threat of losing the traditional spiritual and moral guidelines of sustainable moral principles.

85. Basic moral and cultural norms, religious customs, the

institution of marriage, and family values are exposed to more

and more destructive influence. The freedom of the individual is absolutized, active propaganda of permissiveness, immorality of egoism is carried out, the cult of violence, consumption and pleasure is planted, the use of drugs is legalized, communities are formed that deny the natural continuation of life. The problems

and

of interethnic interfaith relations become the subject of geopolitical games and speculations that give rise to hostility and hatred.

and

86. Planting alien ideals and values, implementation without

regard to historical traditions and of reforms in education, science, culture, religion,

experience

previous generations

and information activities lead to increased disunity language and polarization of national societies, destroy the foundation of cultural sovereignty, undermine the foundations of political stability and statehood. Revision of the basic norms of morality, psychological manipulation inflict




35

irreparable damage to the moral health of a person, encourage destructive

behavior, create conditions for the self-destruction of society. The gap between generations is widening. At the same time, manifestations

of aggressive nationalism, xenophobia, religious extremism and terrorism are growing.

87. Traditional Russian spiritual and moral cultural

of their allies,

and historical values are actively attacked by the US side co of transnational corporations, foreign non-profit nongovemmental, religious, extremist terrorist organizations.
They have an informational and psychological impact on individual, group public consciousness by spreading social moral attitudes that contradict the traditions, beliefs and beliefs of the peoples of the Russian Federation.

also

88. Information-Psychological Sabotage "Westemization"

of culture intensifies the threat of the Russian Federation losing its cultural sovereignty. Attempts to falsify the Russian

co

parties

and

and

and

world history, the distortion

of historical truth and the destruction of historical memory, the incitement of interethnic and interfaith conflicts, the weakening of the state-forming people.

89. Confessions traditional for Russia, culture, the Russian

language as the state language of the Russian Federation are being discredited.

90. The Russian Federation considers its basic spiritual, moral

and cultural-historical values, norms of morality and morality, which have been formed over centuries of national history, as the basis of Russian society, which allows us to preserve and strengthen the sovereignty of the Russian Federation, build the future and reach new heights in the development of society and personality.

91. Traditional Russian spiritual and moral values include,

first of all, life, dignity, human rights and freedoms, patriotism, citizenship, service to the Fatherland and responsibility for

its destiny, high moral ideals, a strong family, creative work, the priority of the spiritual over the material, humanism, mercy, justice, collectivism,




36

and

mutual respect, historical memory,

Mutual Aid continuity of generations, unity of the peoples of Russia.
Traditional Russian spiritual and moral values unite our multinational and multi-confessional country.

92. The protection of traditional Russian spiritual and moral

values, culture and historical memory is carried out in order to strengthen the unity of the peoples of the Russian Federation on the all-Russian civic identity, preserve the original universal principles and socially significant guidelines for social development.

basis

93. The protection of traditional Russian spiritual and moral

values, culture and historical memory is ensured by solving the
following tasks:

1) strengthening civic unity, all-Russian

civic identity, harmony, preservation

interethnic interfaith

and

identity of the

multinational people of the Russian Federation;

2) protection of historical truth, preservation of historical

memory, continuity in the development of the Russian state and its historically established unity, counteraction to the falsification of history;

3) strengthening the institution of the family, preserving traditional

family values, the continuity of generations of Russians;

4) implementation of the state information policy aimed

at strengthening the role of traditional Russian spiritual and moral cultural and historical values in the mass consciousness, rejection by citizens of imposed destructive ideas, stereotypes and behavior pattems;

and

5) development of the system of education, training and upbringing

as the basis for the formation of a developed and socially responsible personality striving for spiritual, moral, intellectual and physical perfection;

FROMOUTSIDE

6) support for public projects aimed at the patriotic education

on the

of citizens, the preservation of the historical memory and culture of the peoples of the Russian Federation;

7) strengthening the cultural sovereignty of the Russian Federation

and maintaining its common cultural space;




37

8) preservation of the tangible and intangible cultural heritage

of the Russian people, popularization of the achievements of Russian science and technology, literature, artistic culture, music and sports,

including

tom

through revision

of educational organizations;

educational programs

9) spiritual, moral and patriotic education of citizens based on historical and modem examples, development of the collective principles of Russian society, support for socially significant initiatives, including volunteer movement;

charitable

volume

10) support for religious organizations of traditional confessions, ensuring their participation in activities aimed at preserving traditional Russian spiritual and moral values, harmonizing Russian society, spreading the culture of interfaith dialogue, countering extremism;

11) formation of a state order for scientific research,

projects,

publication of popular science materials, creation of works of literature cinematographic, theatrical, television, video and Intemet products, the provision of services aimed at preserving traditional Russian spiritual and moral values of culture, protecting historical truth and preserving historical memory, as well as ensuring quality control of the implementation of this state order;

and

art,

and

12) protection and support of the Russian language as the state

language of the Russian Federation, strengthening control over compliance with the norms of the modem Russian literary language, suppression of public performance, distribution through the media of products that contain words and expressions that do not comply with the specified norms (including obscene vocabulary);

13) protection of the Russian society of extemal ideological

OT and value expansion and extemal destructive information and psychological influence, preventing the spread of products of extremist content, propaganda of violence, racial and religious intolerance, ethnic hatred;




38

14) increasing the role of Russia in the world humanitarian,

cultural, scientific and educational space.

Strategic stability and win-win the intemational cooperation

94. Redistribution of the global development potential,

formation of new architecture, rules of the world order are accompanied by an increase in geopolitical instability, exacerbation of interstate contradictions and conflicts.

and

principles

95. Countries that are losing unconditional leadership are

trying to dictate their own rules to other members of the intemational community, use the means of unfair competition, unilaterally apply restrictive measures (sanctions), and openly interfere in the intemal affairs of sovereign states. Such actions lead to the loosening of the universally recognized principles and norms of intemational law, the weakening and destruction of existing institutions and regimes of intemational legal regulation, the aggravation of the military-political situation, the decrease in predictability and the weakening of trust in relations between states.

96. The Russian Federation is pursuing a consistent,

independent, multi-vector, open, predictable and pragmatic

foreign policy aimed at protecting its national interests

and strengthening intemational security.

97. The Russian Federation strives to ensure the stability to

of the system of intemational relations on the basis of unconditional observance of the norms of intemational law, strengthening the central coordinating role of the UN and its Security Council in resolving global and regional problems. 98. The

Russian Federation strives

to

predictability in relations between states, strengthening confidence and security in the intemational sphere. In order to reduce the threat of unleashing a new global war, prevent an arms race and exclude its transfer to new environments, it is necessary to improve the mechanisms for maintaining strategic stability, arms control, preventing

and

on the

increasing




39

proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery, and respect confidence-building measures.

99. Russia remains committed to using political

means, primarily the mechanisms of peacekeeping

diplomacy, in settling intemational intrastate

conflicts. B states committing unfriendly actions that pose a threat to

in the event of foreign

the sovereignty of the territorial integrity of the Russian Federation, including those related to the application of restrictive measures (sanctions) of a political or economic nature, or

tom

and

using modem information

and communication technologies, the Russian Federation considers it lawful to take symmetrical asymmetric necessary

measures, unfriendly actions, in the future.

FOR

suppression of such

also to prevent their recurrence

and

With

and

100. The objectives of the foreign policy of the Russian Federation

ARE to create favorable conditions for socio-economic development of the country, strengthening the national

security, strengthening the positions of the Russian Federation

for the sustainable

as one of the influential centers of the modem world. 101. Achievements Extemal

of goals

IIpolitics of the Russian

Federation is carried out by solving the following tasks:

1) increasing the stability of the intemational legal system, preventing its fragmentation, weakening or selective application of the norms of intemational law; 2)

strengthening intemational peace

and

security, prevention

of the use of military force in violation of the UN Charter, elimination

of the prerequisites for unleashing a global war and the risks of using nuclear weapons;

3) improvement of mechanisms for ensuring collective

security at the global and regional levels, implementation

and

if necessary, the development of confidence-building measures, the prevention

of incidents in the military sphere;

4) maintaining strategic

of mechanisms for non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,

means of their delivery and goods and technologies related to their

production, mechanisms of control over

stability, improvement




40

weapons, as well as mechanisms for responsible behavior in the creation and use of biotechnologies;

5) deepening cooperation with the CIS member states, the

Republic of Abkhazia and the Republic of South Ossetia on a bilateral basis and within the framework of integration associations, primarily the Eurasian Economic Union, the Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Union State;

6) ensuring the integration of economic systems and the development

of multilateral cooperation within the framework of the Greater Eurasian Partnership;

7) development of a comprehensive partnership of

strategic cooperation with the People's Republic of China,

a particularly privileged strategic partnership with the Republic

of India, in

tom

Among the goals are the creation

in the Asia-Pacific region of reliable mechanisms for ensuring

regional stability and security on a non-bloc basis;

8) deepening multidisciplinary cooperation by foreign

and

With

states in the formats of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization BRICS, strengthening the functional institutional foundations of interaction within the framework of the RIC (Russia, India, China);

and

9) support for the development of regional sub-regional

and

integration within the framework of multilateral intemational institutions, dialogue platforms, regional associations, including in the Asia-Pacific region, Latin America and Africa;

10) maintaining an equal and mutually beneficial dialogue with all interested states in order to develop trade and economic

cooperation, strengthening intemational

and

regional stability;

11) assistance in eliminating and preventing the emergence

of hotbeds of tension and conflicts in the territories of states neighboring the Russian Federation;

12) enhancing the role of the Russian Federation in peacekeeping

activities;

13) providing support to allies and partners of the Russian

Federation in resolving issues related to ensuring defense and security, neutralizing attempts at extemal interference in their intemal affairs;




41

14) protection of the rights and interests of citizens of the Russian Federation

and Russian companies abroad;

15) support for the export of Russian

tom

number

goods, in high-tech products, countering the use of Russian companies and discriminatory measures;

means of unfair competition

16) development of intemational trade and economic relations,

assistance in attracting foreign investments, advanced technologies and highly qualified specialists to the Russian Federation;

17) ensuring the interests of the Russian Federation related to

the exploration of outer space, the World Ocean, the Arctic and Antarctic;

18) increasing the role of the Russian Federation in the global

humanitarian, cultural, scientific strengthening the positions of Russian intemational

and

educational space,

language

how

language

communication;

19) providing support to compatriots living abroad in exercising their rights, including the right to preserve the all-Russian cultural identity, ensuring the protection of their interests;

20) strengthening fratemal ties between the Russian, Belarusian and

Ukrainian peoples;

21) counteraction to attempts to falsify history, protection of

historical truth, preservation of historical memory; 22)

strengthening the

positions of Russian funds

media mass information space; 23) development

and

communications

mass

global

cooperation within the framework of intemational

organizations and institutions, expanding the use of tools of network diplomacy;

24) development of military-political military-technical

and

cooperation with foreign states;

25) development of intemational cooperation in the field

of countering terrorism, extremism, corruption, illegal production and trafficking in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, illegal migration, cross-border crime;




42

26) development of intemational cooperation in the interests

of the formation of a safe space;

and

equal global information

27) development of interaction with foreign states in the

field of environmental protection and prevention of climate change;

28) assistance to foreign states in the elimination of the consequences of natural and man-made emergencies, in the fight against biological threats, the spread of dangerous infectious diseases;

29) integration into the world transport space, realization

of the transit potential of the Russian Federation;

30) activation of cooperation in the field of intemational development assistance, primarily in the post-Soviet space;

31) the implementation of work in the post-Soviet space aimed

at creating mutually beneficial approaches for Russia and foreign states to the participation in the activities of intemational organizations,

the implementation of mutual economic assistance, the solution of social and humanitarian issues, as well as issues related to the development of new technologies;

32) expansion of cooperation with the CIS member states

in the field of strengthening biological safety.

V. Organizational bases and mechanisms

implementation of this Strategy

102. public

Authorities

their activities are

guided by the provisions of this Strategy.

103. The implementation of this Strategy is carried

out on a planned basis through coordinated actions of public authorities, organizations and institutions of civil society under the leadership of the President of the Russian Federation of the integrated application of political, organizational, socio-economic, legal, informational, military, special and other measures developed as part of strategic planning in Russian Federation.

on the

per

check




43

104. The tasks envisaged within the framework of

strategic national priorities are solved by developing,

adjusting

and

execution of strategic planning documents,

programs of projects in the field of ensuring national security and socio-economic development of the Russian Federation, as well as their necessary resource support. 105. Control

and

per

implementation

of this Strategy is carried

out within the framework of state monitoring of the state of national security on the basis of indicators of the state of national security

determined by the President of the Russian Federation. The results of such control are reflected in the annual report of the Secretary of the Security Council of the Russian Federation to the President of the Russian Federation on the state of national security and measures to strengthen it.

106. The implementation of this Strategy provides for

the improvement of the system of state administration and

strategic planning in the field of ensuring national security

and socio-economic development of the Russian Federation.

The implementation of this Strategy will help save the

***

people of Russia, develop human potential, improve the quality of life and well-being of citizens, strengthen the country's defense capability, unity and cohesion of Russian society, achieve national development goals, increase the competitiveness and intemational prestige of the Russian Federation.