1 National Security Strategy of the United States of America
D E C E M B E R 2 0 1 7



I
My fellow Americans:
T e American people elected me to make America great again. I promised that my Administration would put the safet , interests, and well-being of our citizens ﬁ rst. I pledged that we would revitalize the American economy, rebuild our military, defend our borders, protect our sovereignty, and advance our values.
During my first year in office, you have witnessed my America First foreign policy in action. We are prioritizing the interests of our citizens and protecting our sovereign rights as a nation. America is leading again on the world stage. We are not hiding from the challenges we face. We are confronting them head-on and pursuing opportunities to promote the securit and prosperit of all Americans.
T e United States faces an extraordinarily dangerous world, ﬁ lled with a wide range of threats that have intensified in recent years. When I came into office, rogue regimes were developing nuclear weapons and missiles to threaten the entire planet. Radical Islamist terror groups were ﬂ ourishing. Terrorists had taken control of vast swaths of the Middle East. Rival powers were aggressively undermining American interests around the globe. At home, porous borders and unenforced immigration laws had created a host of vulnerabilities. Criminal cartels were bringing drugs and danger into our communities. Unfair trade practices had weakened our economy and exported our jobs overseas. Unfair burden-sharing with our allies and inadequate investment in our own defense had invited danger from those who wish us harm. Too many Americans had lost trust in our govemment, faith in our future, and confidence in our values.
Nearly one year later, although serious challenges remain, we are charting a new and very diﬀ erent course.
We are rallying the world against the rogue regime in North Korea and confronting the danger posed by the dictatorship in Iran, which those determined to pursue a flawed nuclear deal had neglected. We have renewed our friendships in the Middle East and partnered with regional leaders to help drive out terrorists and extremists, cut off their financing, and discredit their wicked ideology. We crushed Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) terrorists on the battlefields of Syria and Iraq, and will continue pursuing them until they are destroyed. America’s allies are now contributing more to our common defense, strengthening even our strongest alliances. We have also continued to make clear that the United States will no longer tolerate economic aggression or unfair trading practices.
At home, we have restored confidence in America’s purpose. We have recommitted ourselves to our founding principles and to the values that have made our families, communities, and society so successful. Jobs are coming back and our economy is growing. We are making historic investments in the United States military. We are enforcing our borders, building trade relationships based on faimess and reciprocity, and defending America’s sovereignty without apology.
THE W HITE HOUSE
W A S H I N G T O N , D C 0

N A T I O N A L S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y
II The whole world is lifted by America’s renewal and the reemergence of American leadership. After one year, the world knows that America is prosperous, America is secure, and America is strong. We will bring about the bet er future we seek for our people and the world, by confronting the challenges and dangers posed by those who seek to destabilize the world and threaten America’s people and interests.
My Administration’s National Security Strategy lays out a strategic vision for protecting the American people and preserving our way of life, promoting our prosperity, preserving peace through strength, and advancing American influence in the world. We will pursue this beautiful vision—a world of strong, sovereign, and independent nations, each with its own cultures and dreams, thriving side-by-side in prosperity, freedom, and peace—throughout the upcoming year.
In pursuit of that future, we will look at the world with clear eyes and fresh thinking. We will promote a balance of power that favors the United States, our allies, and our partners. We will never lose sight of our values and their capacity to inspire, uplift, and renew.
Most of all, we will serve the American people and uphold their right to a govemment that prioritizes their security, their prosperity, and their interests. This National Security Strategy puts America First.
President Donald J. Trump T e White House
December 2017 ---Or---




V Table of Contents Introduction ... 1 PI LLAR I : Protect the American People, the Homeland, and the American Way of Life ... 7 Secure U.S. Borders and Territory ...8 Defend Against Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD) ...8 Combat Biothreats and Pandemics ...9 Strengthen Border Control and Immigration Policy ...9 Pursue T reats to T eir Source ...10 Defeat Jihadist Terrorists ...10 Dismantle Transnational Criminal Organizations ...11 Keep America Safe in the Cyber Era ...12 Promote American Resilience ...14 PI LLAR I : Promote American Prosperity ...17 Rejuvenate the Domestic Economy ...18 Promote Free, Fair, and Reciprocal Economic Relationships ...19 Lead in Research, Technology, Invention, and Innovation ... 20 Promote and Protect the U.S. National Securit Innovation Base ...21 Embrace Energy Dominance ...22 PI LLAR I I : Preserve Peace through Strength ...25 Renew America’s Competitive Advantages ... 26 Renew Capabilities ...28 Military ... 28 Defense Industrial Base ... 29 Nuclear Forces ... 30 Space ...31 Cyberspace ...31 Intelligence ... 32
---~O~---

N A T I O N A L S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y
VI Diplomacy and Statecraft ...33 Competitive Diplomacy ... 33 Tools of Economic Diplomacy... 34 Information Statecraf ... 34 PI LLAR IV: Advance American Influence ...37 Encourage Aspiring Partners ...38 Achieve Bet er Outcomes in Multilateral Forums ...40 Champion American Values ...41 The Strategy in a Regional Context ...45 Indo-Paciﬁ c ...45 Europe ...47 Middle East ...48 South and Central Asia ...50 Westem Hemisphere ...51 Africa ...52 Conclusion ... 55
---~O~---




1 Introduction An America that is safe, prosperous, and free at home is an America with the strength, conﬁ dence, and will to lead abroad. It is an America that can preserve peace, uphold libert , and create enduring advantages for the American people. Put ing America ﬁ rst is the dut of our govemment and the foun-dation for U.S. leadership in the world.
A strong America is in the vital interests of not only the American people, but also those around the world who want to partner with the United States in pursuit of shared interests, values, and aspirations.
T is National Securit Strategy puts America ﬁ rst.
A n America First National Security Strategy is based on American prin-ciples, a clear-eyed assessment of U.S. interests, and a determination to tackle the chal-lenges that we face. It is a strategy of principled realism that is guided by outcomes, not ideology.
It is based upon the view that peace, securit , and prosperity depend on strong, sovereign nations that respect their citizens at home and cooper-ate to advance peace abroad. And it is grounded in the realization that American principles are a lasting force for good in the world. “We the People” is America’s source of strength.
T e United States was bom of a desire for life, lib-erty, and the pursuit of happiness—and a convic-tion that unaccountable political power is tyr-anny. For these reasons, our Founders crafted and ratified the Constitution, establishing the repub-lican form of govemment we enjoy today. The Constitution grants our national govemment not only specified powers necessary to protect our God-given rights and liberties but also safeguards them by limiting the govemment’s size and scope, separating Federal powers, and protecting the rights of individuals through the rule of law. All political power is ultimately delegated from, and accountable to, the people.
We protect American sovereignty by defending these institutions, traditions, and principles that have allowed us to live in freedom, to build the nation that we love. And we prize our national heritage, for the rare and fragile institutions of republican gov-emment can only endure if they are sustained by a culture that cherishes those institutions.
Libert and independence have given us the ﬂ our-ishing society Americans enjoy today—a vibrant and confident Nation, welcoming of disagree-ment and differences, but united by the bonds of history, culture, beliefs, and principles that define who we are.
We are proud of our roots and honor the wisdom of the past. We are commit ed to protecting the rights and dignit of every citizen. And we are a nation of laws, because the rule of law is the shield that protects the individual from govemment corruption
---~O~---

N A T I O N A L S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y 2 and abuse of power, allows families to live with-out fear, and permits markets to thrive.
Our founding principles have made the United States of America among the greatest forces for good in history. But we are also aware that we must protect and build upon our accomplish-ments, always conscious of the fact that the interests of the American people constitute our true North Star.
America’s achievements and standing in the world were neither inevitable nor accidental. On many occasions, Americans have had to compete with adversarial forces to preserve and advance our security, prosperity, and the principles we hold dear. At home, we fought the Civil War to end slav-ery and preserve our Union in the long strug-gle to extend equal rights for all Americans. In the course of the bloodiest century in human his-tory, millions of Americans fought, and hun-dreds of thousands lost their lives, to defend lib-ert in two World Wars and the Cold War. America, with our allies and partners, defeated fascism, imperialism, and Soviet communism and elimi-nated any doubts about the power and durability of republican democracy when it is sustained by a free, proud, and unified people.
The United States consolidated its military victories with political and economic triumphs built on market economies and fair trade, dem-ocratic principles, and shared security partner-ships. American political, business, and military leaders worked together with their counterparts in Europe and Asia to shape the post-war order through the United Nations, the Marshall Plan, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), and other institutions designed to advance our shared interests of securit , freedom, and peace. We recog-nize the invaluable advantages that our strong rela-tionships with allies and partners deliver.
Following the remarkable victory of free nations in the Cold War, America emerged as the lone superpower with enormous advantages and momen-tum in the world. Success, however, bred com-placency. A belief emerged, among many, that American power would be unchallenged and self– sustaining. The United States began to drift. We experienced a crisis of confidence and surren-dered our advantages in key areas. As we took our political, economic, and military advan-tages for granted, other actors steadily imple-mented their long-term plans to challenge America and to advance agendas opposed to the United States, our allies, and our partners.
We stood by while countries exploited the intema-tional institutions we helped to build. T ey subsi-dized their industries, forced technology transfers, and distorted markets. These and other actions challenged America’s economic securit . At home, excessive regulations and high taxes stiﬂ ed growth and weakened free enterprise—history’s great-est antidote to poverty. Each time govemment encroached on the productive activities of private commerce, it threatened not only our prosperity but also the spirit of creation and innovation that has been key to our national greatness.
A Competitive World The United States will respond to the growing political, economic, and military competitions we face around the world.
China and Russia challenge American power, inﬂ u-ence, and interests, at empting to erode American security and prosperity. They are determined to make economies less free and less fair, to grow their militaries, and to control information and data to repress their societies and expand their influence. At the same time, the dictatorships of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the Islamic Republic of Iran are determined to desta-bilize regions, threaten Americans and our allies, and brutalize their own people. Transnational
---~O~---

3
I N T R O D U C T I O N threat groups, from jihadist terrorists to transna-tional criminal organizations, are actively trying to harm Americans. While these challenges dif-fer in nature and magnitude, they are fundamen-tally contests between those who value human dignity and freedom and those who oppress individuals and enforce uniformity.
These competitions require the United States to rethink the policies of the past two decades—poli-cies based on the assumption that engagement with rivals and their inclusion in intemational insti-tutions and global commerce would tum them into benign actors and trustworthy partners. For the most part, this premise tumed out to be false.
Rival actors use propaganda and other means to try to discredit democracy. T ey advance anti-Westem views and spread false information to create divi-sions among ourselves, our allies, and our partners.
In addition, jihadist terrorists such as ISIS and al-Qa’ida continue to spread a barbaric ideology that calls for the violent destruction of govemments and innocents they consider to be apostates. T ese jihadist terrorists attempt to force those under their influence to submit to Sharia law.
America’s military remains the strongest in the world. However, U.S. advantages are shrinking as rival states modemize and build up their con-ventional and nuclear forces. Many actors can now field a broad arsenal of advanced missiles, including variants that can reach the American homeland. Access to technology empowers and emboldens otherwise weak states. North Korea—a country that starves its own people—has spent hundreds of millions of dollars on nuclear, chem-ical, and biological weapons that could threaten our homeland. In addition, many actors have become skilled at operating below the thresh-old of military conflict—challenging the United States, our allies, and our partners with hostile actions cloaked in deniabilit . Our task is to ensure that American military superiority endures, and in combination with other elements of national power, is ready to protect Americans against sophisticated challenges to national security.
The contest over information accelerates these political, economic, and military competitions.
Data, like energy, will shape U.S. economic prosper-ity and our future strategic position in the world.
The ability to hamess the power of data is fun-damental to the continuing growth of America’s economy, prevailing against hostile ideologies, and building and deploying the most effective military in the world.
We leamed the diﬃ cult lesson that when America does not lead, malign actors ﬁ ll the void to the dis-advantage of the United States. When America does lead, however, from a position of strength and conﬁ dence and in accordance with our interests and values, all beneﬁ t.
Competition does not always mean hostility, nor does it inevitably lead to conflict—although none should doubt our commitment to defend our interests. An America that successfully competes is the best way to prevent conﬂ ict. Just as American weak-ness invites challenge, American strength and con-fidence deters war and promotes peace.
An America First National Securit Strategy The competitions and rivalries facing the United States are not passing trends or momentary prob-lems. They are intertwined, long-term challenges that demand our sustained national at ention and commitment.
America possesses unmatched political, eco-nomic, military, and technological advantages.
But to maintain these advantages, build upon our strengths, and unleash the talents of the American people, we must protect four vital national interests in this competitive world.
---~O~---

N A T I O N A L S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y 4 First, our fundamental responsibility is to protect the American people, the homeland, and the American way of life. We will strengthen control of our borders and reform our immigra-tion system. We will protect our critical infrastruc-ture and go after malicious cyber actors. A layered missile defense system will defend our homeland against missile at acks. And we will pursue threats to their source, so that jihadist terrorists are stopped before they ever reach our borders.
Second, we will promote American prosperity.
We will rejuvenate the American economy for the benefit of American workers and companies.
We will insist upon fair and reciprocal economic relationships to address trade imbalances. The United States must preserve our lead in research and technology and protect our economy from competitors who unfairly acquire our intellec-tual property. And we will embrace America’s energy dominance because unleashing abundant energy resources stimulates our economy.
Third, we will preserve peace through strength by rebuilding our military so that it remains preeminent, deters our adversaries, and if necessary, is able to fight and win. We will compete with all tools of national power to ensure that regions of the world are not dominated by one power. We will strengthen America’s capabilities—includ-ing in space and cyberspace—and revitalize oth-ers that have been neglected. Allies and partners magnify our power. We expect them to shoul-der a fair share of the burden of responsibil-ity to protect against common threats.
Fourth, we will advance American influence because a world that supports American interests and reflects our values makes America more secure and prosperous. We will compete and lead in multilateral organizations so that American interests and principles are protected. America’s commitment to libert , democracy, and the rule of law serves as an inspiration for those living under t ranny. We can play a catalytic role in promoting private-sector-led economic growth, helping aspir-ing partners become future trading and security partners. And we will remain a generous nation, even as we expect others to share responsibilit .
Strengthening our sovereignty—the first duty of a govemment is to serve the interests of its own people—is a necessary condition for protecting these four national interests. And as we strengthen our sovereignty we will renew confidence in our-selves as a nation. We are proud of our history, optimistic about America’s future, and confident of the positive example the United States oﬀ ers to the world. We are also realistic and understand that the American way of life cannot be imposed upon others, nor is it the inevitable culmination of progress. Together with our allies, partners, and aspiring partners, the United States will pur-sue cooperation with reciprocity. Cooperation means sharing responsibilities and burdens.
In trade, fair and reciprocal relationships ben-efit all with equal levels of market access and opportunities for economic growth. An America First National Security Strategy appreciates that America will catalyze conditions to unleash eco-nomic success for America and the world.
In the United States, free men and women have created the most just and prosperous nation in history. Our generation of Americans is now charged with preserving and defending that precious inheritance. This National Security Strategy shows the way.
---~O~---




7
P I L A R I Protect the American People, the Homeland, and the American Way of Life “We will defend our country, protect our communities, and put the safet of the American people ﬁ rst.”
P R E S I D E N T D O N A L D J . T R U M P | J U LY 2 0 1 7
T his National Security Strategy begins with the determination to protect the American people, the American way of life, and American interests. Americans have long recognized the beneﬁ ts of an interconnected world, where information and commerce flow freely. Engaging with the world, however, does not mean the United States should abandon its rights and duties as a sovereign state or compro-mise its security. Openness also imposes costs, since adversaries exploit our free and demo-cratic system to harm the United States.
North Korea seeks the capabilit to kill millions of Americans with nuclear weapons. Iran supports terrorist groups and openly calls for our destruc-tion. Jihadist terrorist organizations such as ISIS and al-Qa’ida are determined to at ack the United States and radicalize Americans with their hate-ful ideology. Non-state actors undermine social order through drug and human trafficking net-works, which they use to commit violent crimes and kill thousands of American each year.
Adversaries target sources of American strength, including our democratic system and our econ-omy. They steal and exploit our intellectual prop-erty and personal data, interfere in our political processes, target our aviation and maritime sec-tors, and hold our critical infrastructure at risk.
All of these actions threaten the foundations of the American way of life. Reestablishing lawful control of our borders is a first step toward protecting the American homeland and strengthen-ing American sovereignty.
We must prevent nuclear, chemical, radiological, and biological at acks, block terrorists from reach-ing our homeland, reduce drug and human traf-ficking, and protect our critical infrastructure.
We must also deter, disrupt, and defeat poten-tial threats before they reach the United States.
We will target jihadist terrorists and transna-tional criminal organizations at their source and dismantle their networks of support.
We must also take steps to respond quickly to meet the needs of the American people in the event of natural disaster or attack on our homeland. We must build a culture of preparedness and resilience across our govemmental functions, critical infra-structure, and economic and political systems.
---~O~---

N A T I O N A L S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y 8 Secure U.S. Borders and Territory State and non-state actors place the safety of the American people and the Nation’s economic vitality at risk by exploiting vulnerabilities across the land, air, maritime, space, and cyber-space domains. Adversaries constantly evolve their methods to threaten the United States and our citizens. We must be agile and adaptable.
Defend Against Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD) T e danger from hostile state and non-state actors who are trying to acquire nuclear, chemical, radio-logical, and biological weapons is increasing. The Syrian regime’s use of chemical weapons against its own citizens undermines intemational norms against these heinous weapons, which may encourage more actors to pursue and use them. ISIS has used chemical weapons in Iraq and Syria. Terrorist groups con-tinue to pursue WMD-related materials. We would face grave danger if terrorists obtained inadequately secured nuclear, radiological, or biological material.
As missiles grow in numbers, types, and effec-tiveness, to include those with greater ranges, they are the most likely means for states like North Korea to use a nuclear weapon against the United States. North Korea is also pursuing chemical and biological weapons which could also be delivered by missile. China and Russia are developing advanced weapons and capabil-ities that could threaten our critical infrastruc-ture and our command and control architecture.
Priorit Actions ENHANCE MISSILE DEFENSE: The United States is deploying a layered missile defense system focused on North Korea and Iran to defend our homeland against missile attacks. This system will include the ability to defeat missile threats prior to launch. Enhanced missile defense is not intended to undermine strategic stabil-ity or disrupt longstanding strategic relation-ships with Russia or China.
DETECT AND DISRUPT WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION:
At our borders and within our territory, we will bolster efforts to detect nuclear, chemical, radio-logical, and biological agents and keep them from being used against us. We will also better inte-grate intelligence, law enforce-ment, and emergency manage-ment operations to ensure that frontline defenders have the right information and capabili-ties to respond to WMD threats from state and non-state actors.
ENHANCE COUNTERPROLIFERATION MEASURES: Building on decades of initiatives, we will aug-ment measures to secure, eliminate, and prevent the spread of WMD and related materials, their delivery sys-tems, technologies, and knowledge to reduce the chance that they might fall into the hands of hostile actors. We will hold state and nonstate actors accountable for the use of WMD.
TARGET WMD TERRORISTS: We will direct coun-terterrorism operations against terrorist WMD specialists, ﬁ nanciers, administrators, and facilita-tors. We will work with allies and partners to detect and disrupt plots.
Strengthening control over our borders and immigration system is central to national securit , economic prosperit , and the rule of law.
---~O~---

9
PI L A R I : PRO T E C T H E A M E R ICA N PE OPL E , T H E HOM E L A N D, A N D T H E A M E R ICA N WAY OF L I F E Combat Biothreats and Pandemics Biological incidents have the potential to cause catastrophic loss of life. Biological threats to the U.S. homeland—whether as the result of deliberate at ack, accident, or a natural outbreak—are growing and require actions to address them at their source.
Naturally emerging outbreaks of viruses such as Ebola and SARS, as well as the deliberate 2001 anthrax attacks in the United States, demon-strated the impact of biological threats on national security by taking lives, generating economic losses, and contributing to a loss of confidence in govemment institutions.
Advancements in life sciences that benefit our health, economy, and societ also open up new ave-nues to actors who want to cause harm. Dedicated state actors are likely to develop more advanced bioweapons, and these capabilities may become available to malicious non-state actors as well.
Priorit Actions
DETECT AND CONTAIN BIOTHREATS AT THEIR SOURCE:
We will work with other countries to detect and mitigate outbreaks early to prevent the spread of disease. We will encourage other coun-tries to invest in basic health care systems and to strengthen global health security across the intersection of human and animal health to prevent infectious disease outbreaks. And we will work with partners to ensure that laboratories that handle dangerous pathogens have in place safety and security measures.
SUPPORT BIOMEDICAL INNOVATION: We will protect and support advancements in biomedical inno-vation by strengthening the intellectual prop-erty system that is the foundation of the biomedi-cal industry.
IMPROVE EMERGENCY RESPONSE: At home, we will strengthen our emergency response and unified coordination systems to rapidly character-ize outbreaks, implement public health contain-ment measures to limit the spread of disease, and provide surge medical care—including life-saving treatments.
Strengthen Border Control and Immigration Policy Strengthening control over our borders and immigration system is central to national secu-rity, economic prosperity, and the rule of law.
Terrorists, drug traffickers, and criminal car-tels exploit porous borders and threaten U.S. security and public safety. These actors adapt quickly to outpace our defenses.
The United States affirms our sovereign right to determine who should enter our country and under what circumstances. The United States understands the contributions immigrants have made to our Nation throughout its history. Illegal immigration, however, burdens the economy, hurts American workers, presents public safety risks, and enriches smugglers and other criminals.
T e United States recognizes that decisions about who to legally admit for residency, citizenship, or otherwise are among the most important a coun-try has to make. The United States will continue to welcome lawful immigrants who do not pose a security threat and whose entry is consistent with the national interest, while at the same time enhancing the screening and vetting of travelers, closing dangerous loopholes, revising outdated laws, and eliminating easily exploited vulnera-bilities. We will also reform our current immi-gration system, which, contrary to our national interest and national securit , allows for random-ized entry and extended-family chain migration.
Residency and citizenship determinations should be based on individuals’ merits and their ability to positively contribute to U.S. societ , rather than chance or extended family connections.
---~O~---

N A T I O N A L S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y 10 Priorit Actions ENHANCE BORDER SECURITY: We will secure our borders through the construction of a bor-der wall, the use of multilayered defenses and advanced technology, the employment of addi-tional personnel, and other measures. The U.S.
Govemment will work with foreign partners to deter, detect, and disrupt suspicious individuals well before they enter the United States.
ENHANCE VETTING: The U.S. Govemment will enhance vetting of prospective immigrants, ref-ugees, and other foreign visitors to identify indi-viduals who might pose a risk to national secu-rity or public safety. We will set higher security standards to ensure that we keep dangerous peo-ple out of the United States and enhance our information collection and analysis to identify those who may already be within our borders.
ENFORCE IMMIGRATION LAWS: We will enforce immigration laws, both at the border and in the interior, to provide an eﬀ ective deterrent to illegal immigration. T e apprehension and swift removal of illegal aliens at the border is critical to an eﬀ ective border security strategy. We must also increase efforts to identify and counter fraud in the immi-gration process, which undermines the integrity of our immigration system, exploits vulnerable individuals, and creates national security risks.
BOLSTER TR ANSPORTATION SECURIT Y: We will improve information sharing across our gov-emment and with foreign partners to enhance the security of the pathways through which peo-ple and goods enter the country. We will invest in technology to counter emerging threats to our avi-ation, surface, and maritime transportation sec-tors. We will also work with intemational and industry partners to raise security standards.
Pursue T reats to T eir Source There is no perfect defense against the range of threats facing our homeland. That is why America must, alongside allies and partners, stay on the offensive against those violent non-state groups that target the United States and our allies.
T e primary transnational threats Americans face are from jihadist terrorists and transnational crim-inal organizations. Although their objectives diﬀ er, these actors pose some common challenges. First, they exploit our open society. Second, they often operate in loose confederations and adapt rapidly.
T ird, they rely on encrypted communication and the dark web to evade detection as they plot, recruit, ﬁ nance, and execute their operations. Fourth, they thrive under conditions of state weakness and prey on the vulnerable as they accelerate the break-down of rules to create havens from which to plan and launch at acks on the United States, our allies, and our partners. Fifth, some are sheltered and supported by states and do their bidding.
Defeat Jihadist Terrorists Jihadist terrorist organizations present the most dangerous terrorist threat to the Nation. America, alongside our allies and partners, is ﬁ ghting a long war against these fanatics who advance a totali-tarian vision for a global Islamist caliphate that justifies murder and slavery, promotes repres-sion, and seeks to undermine the American way of life. Jihadist terrorists use virtual and physical networks around the world to radicalize isolated individuals, exploit vulnerable populations, and inspire and direct plots.
Even after the territorial defeat of ISIS and al-Qa’ida in Syria and Iraq, the threat from jihadist terror-ists will persist. T ey have used bat leﬁ elds as test beds of terror and have exported tools and tactics to their followers. Many of these jihadist terror-
---~O~---

11
PI L A R I : PRO T E C T H E A M E R ICA N PE OPL E , T H E HOM E L A N D, A N D T H E A M E R ICA N WAY OF L I F E ists are likely to retum to their home countries, from which they can continue to plot and launch at acks on the United States and our allies.
The United States also works with allies and partners to deter and dis-rupt other foreign terror-ist groups that threaten t h e h o m e l a n d — i n c l u d - ing Iranian-backed groups such as Lebanese Hizballah.
Priorit Actions DISRUPT TERROR PLOTS: We will enhance intelligence shar-ing domestically and with for-eign partners. We will give our frontline defenders— including homeland secu-rity, law enforcement, and intelligence profes-sionals—the tools, authorities, and resources to stop terrorist acts before they take place.
TAKE DIRECT ACTION: The U.S. military and other operating agencies will take direct action against terrorist networks and pursue terrorists who threaten the homeland and U.S. citizens regard-less of where they are. T e campaigns against ISIS and al-Qa’ida and their aﬃ liates demonstrate that the United States will enable partners and sus-tain direct action campaigns to destroy terrorists and their sources of support, making it harder for them to plot against us.
ELIMINATE TERRORIST SAFE HAVENS: Time and ter-ritory allow jihadist terrorists to plot, so we will act against sanctuaries and prevent their reemer-gence, before they can threaten the U.S. home-land. We will go after their digital networks and work with private industry to confront the chal-lenge of terrorists and criminals “going dark” and using secure platforms to evade detection.
SEVER SOURCES OF STRENGTH: We will disrupt the ﬁ nancial, materiel, and personnel supply chains of terrorist organizations. We will sever their ﬁ nanc-ing and protect the U.S. and intemational ﬁ nancial systems from abuse. We will degrade their abilit to message and attract poten-tial recruits. This includes combating the evil ideology of jihadists by exposing its falsehoods, promoting count-er-narratives, and amplify-ing credible voices.
SHARE RESPONSIBILIT Y: Our allies and partners, who are also targets of terrorism, will continue to share responsi-bility in fighting these bar-baric groups. We will help our partners develop and respon-sibly employ the capacity to degrade and maintain persistent pressure against terrorists and will encourage partners to work independently of U.S. assistance.
COMBAT RADICALIZATION AND RECRUITMENT IN COMMUNITIES: The United States rejects bigotry and oppression and seeks a future built on our val-ues as one American people. We will deny vio-lent ideologies the space to take root by improving trust among law enforcement, the private sector, and American citizens. U.S. intelligence and home-land security experts will work with law enforce-ment and civic leaders on terrorism prevention and provide accurate and actionable information about radicalization in their communities.
Dismantle Transnational Criminal Organizations The United States must devote greater resources to dismantle transnational criminal organiza-tions (TCOs) and their subsidiary networks. Some have established global supply chains that are We will give our frontline defenders—including homeland securit , law enforcement, and intelligence professionals— the tools, authorities, and resources to stop terrorist acts before they take place.
---~O~---

N A T I O N A L S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y 12 comparable to Fortune 500 corporations. Every day they deliver drugs to American communities, fuel gang violence, and engage in cybercrime. T e illicit opioid epidemic, fed by drug cartels as well as Chinese fentanyl traffickers, kills tens of thou-sands of Americans each year. T ese organizations weaken our allies and partners too, by corrupting and undermining democratic institutions. TCOs are motivated by proﬁ t, power, and political inﬂ u-ence. They exploit weak govemance and enable other national security threats, including terror-ist organizations. In addition, some state adver-saries use TCOs as instruments of national power, offering them territorial sanctuary where they are free to conduct unattributable cyber intru-sions, sabotage, theft, and political subversion.
Priorit Actions
IMPROVE STRATEGIC PLANNING AND INTELLIGENCE:
We will establish national-level strategic intelli-gence and planning capabilities to improve the ability of agen-cies to work together to combat TCOs at home and abroad.
DEFEND COMMUNITIES: We will deny TCOs the ability to harm Americans. We will support public health efforts to halt the growth of illicit drug use in the United States, expand national and community-based preven-tion efforts, increase access to evidenced-based treatment for addiction, improve prescrip-tion drug monitoring, and provide training on substance use disorders for medical personnel.
DEFEND IN DEPTH: U.S. agencies and foreign partners will target TCO leaders and their sup-port infrastructure. We will assist countries, par-ticularly in the Westem Hemisphere, to break the power of these organizations and networks.
COUNTER CYBER CRIMINALS: We will use sophisti-cated investigative tools to disrupt the ability of criminals to use online marketplaces, crypto-currencies, and other tools for illicit activities.
T e United States will hold countries accountable for harboring these criminals.
Keep America Safe in the Cyber Era America’s response to the challenges and oppor-tunities of the cyber era will determine our future prosperit and securit . For most of our history, the United States has been able to protect the home-land by controlling its land, air, space, and mari-time domains. Today, cyberspace offers state and non-state actors the ability to wage campaigns against American political, economic, and secu-rity interests without ever physically crossing our borders. Cyberattacks offer adversaries low-cost and deniable opportunities to seriously damage or disrupt critical infrastructure, cripple American businesses, weaken our Federal networks, and attack the tools and devices that Americans use every day to com-municate and conduct business.
Critical infrastructure keeps our food fresh, our houses warm, our trade flowing, and our cit-izens productive and safe. The vulnerability of U.S. critical infrastructure to cyber, phys-ical, and electromagnetic attacks means that adversaries could disrupt military command and control, banking and ﬁ nancial operations, the elec-trical grid, and means of communication.
Federal networks also face threats. T ese networks allow govemment agencies to carry out vital func-tions and provide services to the American peo-America’s response to the challenges and opportunities of the cyber era will determine our future prosperit and securit .
---~O~---

13
PI L A R I : PRO T E C T H E A M E R ICA N PE OPL E , T H E HOM E L A N D, A N D T H E A M E R ICA N WAY OF L I F E ple. The govemment must do a better job of protecting data to safeguard information and the privacy of the American people. Our Federal net-works must be modemized and updated.
In addition, the daily lives of most Americans rely on computer-driven and interconnected technolo-gies. As our reliance on computers and connectiv-ity increases, we become increasingly vulnerable to cyberattacks. Businesses and individuals must be able to operate securely in cyberspace.
Security was not a major consideration when the Intemet was designed and launched. As it evolves, the govemment and private sector must design systems that incorporate prevention, protec-tion, and resiliency from the start, not as an after-thought. We must do so in a way that respects free markets, private competition, and the limited but important role of govemment in enforcing the rule of law. As we build the next generation of dig-ital infrastructure, we have an opportunit to put our experience into practice.
The Intemet is an American invention, and it should reflect our values as it continues to transform the future for all nations and all genera-tions. A strong, defensible cyber infrastructure fosters economic growth, protects our liberties, and advances our national security.
Priorit Actions IDENTIFY AND PRIORITIZE RISK: To improve the secu-rity and resilience of our critical infrastruc-ture, we will assess risk across six key areas: national securit , energy and power, banking and finance, health and safety, communications, and transportation. We will assess where cyberat-tacks could have catastrophic or cascading con-sequences and prioritize our protective efforts, capabilities, and defenses accordingly.
BUILD DEFENSIBLE GOVERNMENT NETWORKS: We will use the latest commercial capabilities, shared ser-vices, and best practices to modemize our Federal information technology. We will improve our abil-it to provide uninterrupted and secure communi-cations and services under all conditions.
DETER AND DISRUPT MALICIOUS CYBER ACTORS:
The Federal Govemment will ensure that those charged with securing critical infrastructure have the necessary authorities, information, and capa-bilities to prevent attacks before they affect or hold at risk U.S. critical infrastructure. T e United States will impose swift and costly consequences on foreign govemments, criminals, and other actors who undertake signiﬁ cant malicious cyber activities. We will work with allies and friends to expand our awareness of malicious activities. A stronger and more resilient critical infrastructure will strengthen deterrence by creating doubt in our adversaries that they can achieve their objectives.
IMPROVE INFORMATION SHARING AND SENSING:
The U.S. Govemment will work with our critical infrastructure partners to assess their informa-tional needs and to reduce the barriers to informa-tion sharing, such as speed and classification lev-els. We will also invest in capabilities that improve the ability of the United States to attribute cyber-at acks. In accordance with the protection of civil liberties and privacy, the U.S. Govemment will expand collaboration with the private sector so that we can bet er detect and at ribute at acks.
DEPLOY LAYERED DEFENSES: Since threats transit globally, passing through communications back-bones without challenge, the U.S. Govemment will work with the private sector to remediate known bad activities at the network level to improve the security of all customers. Malicious activ-ity must be defeated within a network and not be passed on to its destination whenever possible.
---~O~---

N A T I O N A L S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y 14 Promote American Resilience Despite our best efforts, our govemment cannot prevent all dangers to the American people. We can, however, help Americans remain resilient in the face of adversity. Resilience includes the abil-ity to withstand and recover rapidly from delib-erate attacks, accidents, natural disasters, as well as unconventional stresses, shocks, and threats to our economy and democratic system. In the event of a disaster, Federal, state, and local agen-cies must perform essential functions and have plans in place to ensure the continuation of our constitutional form of govemment.
Reducing risk and building more resilient com-munities are the best ways to protect people, prop-erty, and taxpayer dollars from loss and disrup-tion. Through risk-informed investments, we will build resilient communities and infrastructure to protect and beneﬁ t future generations.
Should tragedy strike, the U.S. Govemment will help communities recover and rebuild. Citizens must be conﬁ dent in our govemment, but also rec-ognize that response and recovery begins with individuals and local communities. In difficult times, the true character of the American peo-ple emerges: their strength, their love, and their resolve. Our ﬁ rst responders selﬂ essly run toward danger, and volunteers rally to the aid of neigh-bors when disaster strikes.
A democracy is only as resilient as its people. An informed and engaged citizenry is the fundamen-tal requirement for a free and resilient nation. For generations, our society has protected free press, free speech, and free thought. Today, actors such as Russia are using information tools in an at empt to undermine the legitimacy of democracies.
Adversaries target media, political processes, ﬁ nan-cial networks, and personal data. The American public and private sectors must recognize this and work together to defend our way of life. No exter-nal threat can be allowed to shake our shared commitment to our values, undermine our sys-tem of govemment, or divide our Nation.
Priorit Actions IMPROVE RISK MANAGEMENT: The United States will improve its ability to assess the threats and haz-ards that pose the greatest risks to Americans and will prioritize resources based on the high-est risks.
BUILD A CULTURE OF PREPAREDNESS: This Admin-istration will take steps to build a culture of preparedness, informing and empowering commu-nities and individuals to obtain the skills and take the preparatory actions necessary to become more resilient against the threats and hazards that Americans face.
IMPROVE PLANNING: State and local govemments must conduct realistic exercises that test exist-ing plans to make sure that they are sound and can be executed. Agencies from all levels of gov-emment must coordinate bet er and apply lessons leamed from exercises to pinpoint the areas and capabilities that require improvement.
INCENTIVIZE INFORMATION SHARING: To improve the coordination among the private sector and all lev-els of govemment that is needed to improve resil-ience, we must make a stronger commitment to protecting sensitive information so that all part-ners actively identify and share vulnerabilities and work collaboratively to reduce them.
---~O~---




17
P I L A R I Promote American Prosperity “Economic securit is national securit .”
P R E S I D E N T D O N A L D J . T R U M P | N O V E M B E R 2 0 1 7
A strong economy protects the American people, supports our way of life, and sus-tains American power. American work-ers thrive when they are free to innovate, develop and access our abundant natural resources, and operate in markets free from excessive regula-tions and unfair foreign trade practices. A grow-ing and innovative economy allows the United States to maintain the world’s most powerful mili-tary and protect our homeland.
We must rebuild our economic strength and restore confidence in the American economic model. Over decades, American factories, com-panies, and jobs moved overseas. After the 2008 global ﬁ nancial crisis, doubt replaced conﬁ dence.
Risk-aversion and regulations replaced investment and entrepreneurship. T e recovery produced ane-mic growth in real eamings for American workers.
T e U.S. trade deﬁ cit grew as a result of several fac-tors, including unfair trading practices.
For 70 years, the United States has embraced a strategy premised on the belief that leadership of a stable intemational economic system rooted in American principles of reciprocity, free mar-kets, and free trade served our economic and security interests. Working with our allies and partners, the United States led the creation of a group of financial institutions and other eco-nomic forums that established equitable rules and built instruments to stabilize the intema-tional economy and remove the points of friction that had contributed to two world wars.
That economic system continues to serve our interests, but it must be reformed to help American workers prosper, protect our innovation, and reflect the principles upon which that sys-tem was founded. Trading partners and intemational institutions can do more to address trade imbalances and adhere to and enforce the rules of the order.
Today, American prosperity and security are challenged by an economic competition play-ing out in a broader strategic context. The United States helped expand the liberal economic trad-ing system to countries that did not share our val-ues, in the hopes that these states would liber-alize their economic and political practices and provide commensurate benefits to the United States. Experience shows that these countries dis-torted and undermined key economic institu-tions without undertaking significant reform of their economies or politics. T ey espouse free trade rhetoric and exploit its benefits, but only adhere selectively to the rules and agreements.
We welcome all economic relationships rooted in faimess, reciprocit , and faithful adherence to the rules. T ose who join this pursuit will be our clos-est economic partners. But the United States will no longer tum a blind eye to violations, cheating, or economic aggression. We must work with like- (§;;e) (§;;e)
1111
---~O~---

N A T I O N A L S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y 18 minded allies and partners to ensure our princi-ples prevail and the rules are enforced so that our economies prosper.
The United States will pursue an economic strategy that reju-venates the domestic economy, benefits the American worker, revitalizes the U.S. manufactur-ing base, creates middle-class jobs, encourages innovation, preserves technological advantage, safeguards the environment, and achieves energy dominance.
Rebuilding economic strength at home and preserving a fair and reciprocal intemational economic system will enhance our security and advance pros-perity and peace in the world.
Rejuvenate the Domestic Economy Economic challenges at home demand that we understand economic prosperity as a pillar of national security. Despite low unemployment rates and stock market gains, overall economic growth has, until recently, been anemic since the 2008 recession. In the past five years, gross domestic product (GDP) growth hovered barely above two percent, and wages stagnated. Taxes increased, and health insurance and prescrip-tion drug costs continued to rise, albeit at a slower pace. Education costs climbed at rates far above inflation, increasing student debt. Productivity growth fell to levels not seen in decades.
Signiﬁ cant govemment intrusion in the economy slowed growth and job creation. Regulatory and corporate tax policies incentivized businesses to invest overseas and disadvantaged American com-panies against foreign competitors. Excessive reg-ulation burdened small businesses. Banking regu-lations squelched new bank formation and caused hundreds of small banks to close. Regulation decreased credit availability to consumers and decreased prod-uct choice. Excessive environ-mental and infrastructure reg-ulations impeded American energy trade and the devel-opment of new infrastruc-ture projects.
Moreover, the poor state of our physical infrastructure stulti-fied the economy, reduced the profitability of American small businesses, and slowed the productivity of American workers.
America’s digital infrastructure also fell behind. Improvements in bandwidth, better broadband connectiv-ity, and protection from persistent cyberattacks are needed to support America’s future growth.
Economic and personal transactions are depen-dent upon the “.com world,” and wealth creation depends on a reliable, secure Intemet.
The Administration is dedicated to rejuvenat-ing the U.S. economy, unleashing the potential of all Americans, and restoring confidence in our free market system. Promoting American pros-perity makes America more secure and advances American inﬂ uence in the world.
Priorit Actions REDUCE REGULATORY BURDENS: Departments and agencies will eliminate unnecessary regulations that stiﬂ e growth, drive up costs for American busi-nesses, impede research and development, dis-courage hiring, and incentivize domestic busi-nesses to move overseas. We will balance our reduction in regulations with adequate protec-tions and oversight.
Rebuilding economic strength at home and preserving a fair and reciprocal intemational economic system will enhance our securit and advance prosperit and peace in the world.
---~O~---

19
P I L A R I : P R O M O T E A M E R I C A N P R O S P E R I T Y PROMOTE TAX REFORM: This Administration will work with the Congress to create a simpler, fairer, and pro-growth tax code that encourages the creation of higher wage jobs and gives middle-income families tax relief. Reduced business tax rates and a territorial system for foreign subsidiary eamings will improve the competitive-ness of American companies and encourage their retum to the United States.
IMPROVE AMERICAN INFRASTRUCTURE: Federal, state, and local govemments will work together with pri-vate industry to improve our airports, seaports and waterways, roads and railways, transit sys-tems, and telecommunications. T e United States will use our strategic advantage as a leading natu-ral gas producer to transform transportation and manufacturing. We will improve America’s digital infrastructure by deploying a secure 5G Intemet capability nationwide. These improvements will increase national competitiveness, beneﬁ t the envi-ronment, and improve our qualit of life.
REDUCE THE DEBT THROUGH FISCAL RESPONSIBILITY: The national debt, now over $20 trillion, pres-ents a grave threat to America’s long-term prosperity and, by extension, our national securit .
By restraining Federal spending, making govemment more effi-cient, and by modemizing our tax system and making our busi-nesses globally competitive, our economy will grow and make the existing debt more serviceable.
S U P O R T E D U C A T I O N A N D
A P R E N T I C E S H I P R O G R A M S :
We will support apprenticeships and work-forc e development prog ra m s t h at pre - pa re A mer ic a n workers for h ig h-wa ge manufacturing and science, technology, engi-neering, and mathematics (STEM) jobs of the 21st century.
Promote Free, Fair, and Reciprocal Economic Relationships For decades, the United States has allowed unfair trading practices to grow. Other countries have used dumping, discriminatory non-tariff barri-ers, forced technology transfers, non-economic capacity, industrial subsidies, and other support from govemments and state-owned enterprises to gain economic advantages.
Today we must meet the challenge. We will address persistent trade imbalances, break down trade barriers, and provide Americans new opportuni-ties to increase their exports. The United States will expand trade that is fairer so that U.S. work-ers and industries have more opportunities to compete for business. We oppose closed mercan-tilist trading blocks. By strengthening the intemational trading system and incentivizing other countries to embrace mar-ket-friendly policies, we can enhance our prosperit .
T e United States distinguishes between economic competition with countries that follow fair and free market principles and competition with those that act with little regard for those prin-ciples. We will compete with like-minded states in the eco-nomic domain—particularly where trade imbalances exist— while recognizing that compe-tition is healthy when nations share values and build fair and reciprocal rela-tionships. The United States will pursue enforce-ment actions when countries violate the rules to gain unfair advantage. The United States will engage industrialized democracies and other like-minded states to defend against economic aggres-T e Administration is dedicated to rejuvenating the U.S. economy, unleashing the potential of all Americans, and restoring conﬁ dence in our free market system.
---~O~---

N A T I O N A L S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y 20 sion, in all its forms, that threatens our com-mon prosperity and security.
Priorit Actions
ADOPT NEW TRADE AND INVESTMENT AGREEMENTS AND MODERNIZE EXISTING ONES: The United States will pursue bilateral trade and investment agree-ments with countries that commit to fair and recip-rocal trade and will modemize existing agree-ments to ensure they are consistent with those principles. Agreements must adhere to high stan-dards in intellectual property, digital trade, agri-culture, labor, and the environment.
COUNTER UNFAIR TRADE PRACTICES: The United States will counter all unfair trade practices that distort markets using all appropriate means, from dialogue to enforcement tools.
COUNTER FOREIGN CORRUPTION: Using our eco-nomic and diplomatic tools, the United States will continue to target corrupt foreign officials and work with countries to improve their ability to
fight corruption so U.S. companies can compete fairly in transparent business climates.
WORK WITH LIKE-MINDED PARTNERS: The United States will work with like-minded partners to preserve and modemize the rules of a fair and recip-rocal economic order. Together we will emphasize fair trade enforcement actions when necessary, as well as multinational efforts to ensure transpar-ency and adherence to intemational standards within trade and investment projects.
FACILITATE NEW MARKET OPPORTUNITIES: T e United States will partner with countries as they build their export markets, promote free market com-petition, and incentivize private sector growth.
We will expand U.S. trade and investment oppor-tunities and increase the market base for U.S. goods and services.
Lead in Research, Technology, Invention, and Innovation The United States will build on the ingenuity that has launched industries, created jobs, and improved the quality of life at home and abroad.
To maintain our competitive advantage, the United States will prioritize emerging technolo-gies critical to economic growth and securit , such as data science, encryption, autonomous tech-nologies, gene editing, new materials, nanotech-nology, advanced computing technologies, and artificial intelligence. From self-driving cars to autonomous weapons, the ﬁ eld of artiﬁ cial intelli-gence, in particular, is progressing rapidly.
T e United States must continue to at ract the inno-vative and the inventive, the brilliant and the bold.
We will encourage scientists in govemment, aca-demia, and the private sector to achieve advance-ments across the full spectrum of discovery, from incremental improvements to game-changing breakthroughs. We will nurture a healthy inno-vation economy that collaborates with allies and partners, improves STEM education, draws on an advanced technical workforce, and invests in ear-ly-stage research and development (R&D).
Priorit Actions
UNDE RSTAND WORLDWIDE SCIE NCE AND TECH - NOLOGY (S&T) TRENDS: To retain U.S. advantages over our competitors, U.S. Govemment agencies must improve their understanding of worldwide S&T trends and how they are likely to influence— or undermine—American strategies and programs.
ATTRACT AND RETAIN INVENTORS AND INNOVATORS:
The U.S. Govemment must improve our collab-oration with industry and academia and our recruitment of technical talent. We will remove barriers to the full use of talent across Federal agencies, and increase incentives for hiring and retaining Federal STEM employees. Initiatives
---~O~---

21
P I L A R I : P R O M O T E A M E R I C A N P R O S P E R I T Y will include rapid hiring, swift adjudication of national security clearances, and offers of com-petitive salaries. We must create easier paths for the flow of scientists, engineers, and technol-ogists into and out of public service.
LEVERAGE PRIVATE CAPITAL AND EXPERTISE TO BUILD AND INNOVATE: The U.S. Govemment will use pri-vate sector technical expertise and R&D capabili-ties more eﬀ ectively. Private industry owns many of the technologies that the govemment relies upon for critical national security missions. The Department of Defense and other agencies will establish strategic partnerships with U.S. compa-nies to help align private sector R&D resources to priority national security applications.
RAPIDLY FIELD INVENTIONS AND INNOVATIONS: The United States must regain the element of surprise and field new technologies at the pace of mod-em industry. Govemment agencies must shift from an archaic R&D process to an approach that rewards rapid fielding and risk taking.
Promote and Protect the U.S. National Securit Innovation Base America’s business climate and legal and regu-latory systems encourage risk taking. We are a nation of people who work hard, dream big, and never give up. Not every country shares these characteristics. Some instead steal or illicitly acquire America’s hard-eamed intellectual prop-erty and proprietary information to compensate for their own systemic weaknesses.
Every year, competitors such as China steal U.S. intellectual property valued at hundreds of bil-lions of dollars. Stealing proprietary technol-ogy and early-stage ideas allows competitors to unfairly tap into the innovation of free societ-ies. Over the years, rivals have used sophisticated means to weaken our businesses and our econ-omy as facets of cyber-enabled economic war-fare and other malicious activities. In addition to these illegal means, some actors use largely legit-imate, legal transfers and relationships to gain access to fields, experts, and trusted foundries that fill their capability gaps and erode America’s long-term competitive advantages.
We must defend our National Securit Innovation Base (NSIB) against competitors. The NSIB is the American network of knowledge, capabili-ties, and people—including academia, National Laboratories, and the private sector—that tums ideas into innovations, transforms discoveries into successful commercial products and com-panies, and protects and enhances the American way of life. T e genius of creative Americans, and the free system that enables them, is critical to American security and prosperity.
Protecting the NSIB requires a domestic and intemational response beyond the scope of any indi-vidual company, industry, university, or govem-ment agency. The landscape of innovation does not divide neatly into sectors. Technologies that are part of most weapon systems often originate in diverse businesses as well as in universities and colleges. Losing our innovation and technologi-cal edge would have far-reaching negative implica-tions for American prosperit and power.
Priorit Actions UNDERSTAND THE CHALLENGES: T e U.S. Govemment will develop a capabilit to integrate, monitor, and better understand the national security implica-tions of unfair industry trends and the actions of our rivals. We will explore new ways to share this information with the private sector and academia so they bet er understand their responsibilities in curtailing activities that undercut America’s NSIB.
PROTECT INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY: T e United States will reduce the illicit appropriation of U.S. pub-
---~O~---

N A T I O N A L S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y 22 lic and private sector technology and technical knowledge by hostile foreign competitors. While maintaining an investor-friendly climate, this Administration will work with the Congress to strengthen the Commit ee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS) to ensure it addresses current and future national securit risks. T e United States will prioritize counterintel-ligence and law enforcement activities to curtail intellectual property theft by all sources and will explore new legal and regulatory mechanisms to prevent and prosecute violations.
T I G H T E N V I S A P R O C E D U R E S :
The United States will review visa procedures to reduce economic theft by non-traditional intelligence collectors. We will consider restrictions on foreign STEM stu-dents from designated countries to ensure that intellectual property is not transferred to our competitors, while acknowledging the importance of recruiting the most advanced tech-nical workforce to the United States.
PROTECT DATA AND UNDERLYING INFRASTRUCTURE:
The United States will expand our focus beyond protecting networks to protecting the data on those networks so that it remains secure—both at rest and in transit. To do this, the U.S. Govemment will encourage practices across companies and universities to defeat espionage and theft.
Embrace Energy Dominance For the ﬁ rst time in generations, the United States will be an energy-dominant nation. Energy dom-inance—America’s central position in the global energy system as a leading producer, consumer, and innovator—ensures that markets are free and U.S. infrastructure is resilient and secure. It ensures that access to energy is diversiﬁ ed, and recognizes the importance of environmental stewardship.
Access to domestic sources of clean, affordable, and reliable energy underpins a prosperous, secure, and powerful America for decades to come.
Unleashing these abundant energy resources—coal, natural gas, petroleum, renewables, and nuclear—stimulates the econ-omy and builds a foundation for future growth. Our Nation must take advantage of our wealth in domestic resources and energy efficiency to promote competi-tiveness across our industries.
The United States also anchors the North American energy sys-tem, which is one of the most highly integrated in the world. Our vibrant cross-border energy trade and investment are vital for a robust and resilient U.S. economy and energy market. We are com-mitted to supporting energy initiatives that will attract investments, safeguard the environment, strengthen our energy security, and unlock the enormous potential of our shared region.
Climate policies will continue to shape the global energy system. U.S. leadership is indispensable to countering an anti-growth energy agenda that is detrimental to U.S. economic and energy secu-rit interests. Given future global energy demand, much of the developing world will require fossil fuels, as well as other forms of energy, to power their economies and lift their people out of povert . T e United States will continue to advance an approach that balances energy security, economic develop-ment, and environmental protection. The United States will remain a global leader in reducing tradi-tional pollution, as well as greenhouse gases, while expanding our economy. T is achievement, which can serve as a model to other countries, ﬂ ows from innovation, technology breakthroughs, and energy efficiency gains, not from onerous regulation.
For the ﬁ rst time in generations, the United States will be an energy-dominant nation.
---~O~---

23
P I L A R I : P R O M O T E A M E R I C A N P R O S P E R I T Y As a growing supplier of energy resources, technol-ogies, and services around the world, the United States will help our allies and partners become more resilient against those that use energy to coerce. America’s role as an energy exporter will also require an assessment of our vulnerabilities and a resilient American infrastructure.
Finally, the Nation’s long-term energy security future rests with our people. We must invest in our future by supporting innovation and R&D, includ-ing through the National Laboratories.
Priorit Actions REDUCE BARRIERS: T e United States will promote clean and safe development of our energy resources, while limiting regulatory burdens that encum-ber energy production and constrain economic growth. We will streamline the Federal regula-tory approval processes for energy infrastructure, from pipeline and export terminals to container shipments and gathering lines, while also ensuring responsible environmental stewardship.
PROMOTE EXPORTS: The United States will promote exports of our energy resources, technolo-gies, and services, which helps our allies and part-ners diversify their energy sources and brings economic gains back home. We will expand our export capacit through the continued support of private sector development of coastal terminals, allowing increased market access and a greater competitive edge for U.S. industries.
ENSURE ENERGY SECURITY: The United States will work with allies and partners to protect global energy infrastructure from cyber and physical threats. The United States will support the diver-sification of energy sources, supplies, and routes at home and abroad. We will modemize our stra-tegic petroleum stocks and encourage other countries to develop their own—consistent with their national energy security needs.
ATTAIN UNIVERSAL ENERGY ACCESS: The United States will seek to ensure universal access to affordable, reliable energy, including highly effi-cient fossil fuels, nuclear, and renewables, to help reduce poverty, foster economic growth, and promote prosperity.
FURTHER AMERICA’S TECHNOLOGICAL EDGE: We will improve America’s technological edge in energy, including nuclear technology, next-generation nuclear reactors, better batteries, advanced com-puting, carbon-capture technologies, and opportu-nities at the energy-water nexus. T e United States will continue to lead in innovative and efficient energy technologies, recognizing the economic and environmental beneﬁ ts to end users.
---~O~---



25
P I L A R I I Preserve Peace Through Strength “As long as I am President, the servicemen and women who defend our Nation will have the equipment, the resources, and the funding they need to secure our homeland, to respond to our enemies quickly and decisively, and, when necessary, to ﬁ ght, to overpower, and to always, always, always win.”
P R E S I D E N T D O N A L D J . T R U M P | D E C E M B E R 2 0 1 7
A central continuity in history is the con-test for power. The present time period is no different. Three main sets of chal-lengers—the revisionist powers of China and Russia, the rogue states of Iran and North Korea, and transnational threat organizations, particu-larly jihadist terrorist groups—are actively com-peting against the United States and our allies and partners. Although differing in nature and magnitude, these rivals compete across politi-cal, economic, and military arenas, and use tech-nology and information to accelerate these con-tests in order to shift regional balances of power in their favor. These are fundamentally political contests between those who favor repressive sys-tems and those who favor free societies.
China and Russia want to shape a world antithetical to U.S. values and interests. China seeks to displace the United States in the Indo-Paciﬁ c region, expand the reaches of its state-driven economic model, and reorder the region in its favor. Russia seeks to restore its great power status and establish spheres of influence near its borders. The intentions of both nations are not necessarily ﬁ xed. T e United States stands ready to cooperate across areas of mutual interest with both countries.
For decades, U.S. policy was rooted in the belief that support for China’s rise and for its integra-tion into the post-war intemational order would liberalize China. Contrary to our hopes, China expanded its power at the expense of the sov-ereignty of others. China gathers and exploits data on an unrivaled scale and spreads features of its authoritarian system, including corrup-tion and the use of surveillance. It is building the most capable and well-funded military in the world, after our own. Its nuclear arsenal is grow-ing and diversif ing. Part of China’s military mod-emization and economic expansion is due to its access to the U.S. innovation economy, includ-ing America’s world-class universities.
Russia aims to weaken U.S. inﬂ uence in the world and divide us from our allies and partners. Russia views the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and European Union (EU) as threats. Russia is investing in new military capabilities, includ-ing nuclear systems that remain the most signifi-cant existential threat to the United States, and in
---~O~---

N A T I O N A L S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y 26 destabilizing cyber capabilities. T rough modem-ized forms of subversive tactics, Russia interferes in the domestic political aﬀ airs of countries around the world. The combination of Russian ambition and growing military capabilities creates an unsta-ble frontier in Eurasia, where the risk of conflict due to Russian miscalculation is growing.
T e scourge of the world today is a small group of rogue regimes that violate all principles of free and civilized states. The Iranian regime spon-sors terrorism around the world. It is developing more capable ballistic missiles and has the poten-tial to resume its work on nuclear weapons that could threaten the United States and our part-ners. North Korea is ruled as a ruthless dictator-ship without regard for human dignity. For more than 25 years, it has pursued nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles in deﬁ ance of every commit-ment it has made. Today, these missiles and weap-ons threaten the United States and our allies. T e longer we ignore threats from countries deter-mined to proliferate and develop weapons of mass destruction, the worse such threats become, and the fewer defensive options we have.
The United States continues to wage a long war against jihadist terrorist groups such as ISIS and al-Qa’ida. These groups are linked by a common radical Islamist ideology that encourages vio-lence against the United States and our partners and produces misery for those under their control.
Although the United States and our partners have inﬂ icted defeats on ISIS and al-Qa’ida in Syria and Iraq, these organizations maintain global reach with established branches in strategic locations.
The threat from jihadist terrorists will persist, even as we intensify efforts to prevent attacks on Americans, our allies, and our partners.
Protecting American interests requires that we compete continuously within and across these contests, which are being played out in regions around the world. The outcome of these con-tests will influence the political, economic, and military strength of the United States and our allies and partners.
To prevail, we must integrate all elements of America’s national power—political, economic, and military. Our allies and partners must also con-tribute the capabilities, and demonstrate the will, to confront shared threats. Experience suggests that the willingness of rivals to abandon or forgo aggression depends on their perception of U.S. strength and the vitalit of our alliances.
The United States will seek areas of cooperation with competitors from a position of strength, fore-most by ensuring our military power is second to none and fully integrated with our allies and all of our instruments of power. A strong mili-tary ensures that our diplomats are able to oper-ate from a position of strength. In this way we can, together with our allies and partners, deter and if necessary, defeat aggression against U.S. interests and increase the likelihood of managing competi-tions without violent conﬂ ict and preserving peace.
Renew America’s Competitive Advantages The United States must consider what is endur-ing about the problems we face, and what is new.
The contests over influence are timeless. They have existed in varying degrees and levels of inten-sity, for millennia. Geopolitics is the interplay of these contests across the globe. But some condi-tions are new, and have changed how these com-petitions are unfolding. We face simultaneous threats from different actors across multiple are-nas—all accelerated by technology. The United States must develop new concepts and capabili-ties to protect our homeland, advance our pros-perit , and preserve peace.
---~O~---

27 Since the 1990s, the United States displayed a great degree of strategic complacency. We assumed that our military superiorit was guaranteed and that a democratic peace was inevitable. We believed that liberal-democratic enlargement and inclu-sion would fundamentally alter the nature of intemational rela-tions and that competition would give way to peaceful cooperation.
I n stead of bu i ld i ng m i l i-tary capacity, as threats to our national security increased, the United States dramatically cut the size of our military to the lowest levels since 1940.
Instead of developing import-ant capabilities, the Joint Force entered a nearly decade long “procurement holiday” during which the acquisition of new weapon systems was severely limited. The breakdown of the Nation’s annual Federal budgeting process, exem-plified by sequestration and repeated continu-ing resolutions, further contributed to the ero-sion of America’s military dominance during a time of increasing threats.
Despite decades of efforts to reform the way that the United States develops and procures new weap-ons, our acquisition system remained sclerotic.
The Joint Force did not keep pace with emerg-ing threats or technologies. We got less for our defense dollars, shortchanging American tax-payers and warﬁ ghters.
We also incorrectly believed that technology could compensate for our reduced capacit —for the abil-it to ﬁ eld enough forces to prevail militarily, con-solidate our gains, and achieve our desired polit-ical ends. We convinced ourselves that all wars would be fought and won quickly, from stand-off distances and with minimal casualties.
In addition, after being dismissed as a phenom-enon of an earlier century, great power competi-tion retumed. China and Russia began to reassert their inﬂ uence regionally and globally. Today, they are ﬁ elding military capabilities designed to deny America access in times of cri-sis and to contest our ability to operate freely in critical com-mercial zones during peacetime.
In short, they are contesting our geopolitical advantages and try-ing to change the intemational order in their favor.
Moreover, deterrence today is significantly more com-plex to achieve than during the Cold War. Adversaries stud-ied the American way of war and began investing in capabil-ities that targeted our strengths and sought to exploit perceived weaknesses. The spread of accu-rate and inexpensive weap-ons and the use of cyber tools have allowed state and non-state competitors to harm the United States across various domains. Such capabili-ties contest what was until recently U.S. domi-nance across the land, air, maritime, space, and cyberspace domains. They also enable adversar-ies to at empt strategic at acks against the United States—without resorting to nuclear weapons—in ways that could cripple our economy and our abil-it to deploy our military forces. Deterrence must be extended across all of these domains and must address all possible strategic attacks.
In addition, adversaries and competitors became adept at operating below the threshold of open military conflict and at the edges of intema-tional law. Repressive, closed states and orga-nizations, although brittle in many ways, are often more agile and faster at integrating eco-nomic, military, and especially informational
P I L A R I I : P R E S E R V E P E A C E T H R O U G H S T R E N G T H T e United States will seek areas of cooperation with competitors from a position of strength, foremost by ensuring our military power is second to none and fully integrated with our allies and all of our instruments of power.
---~O~---

N A T I O N A L S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y 28 means to achieve their goals. They are unencum-bered by truth, by the rules and protections of pri-vacy inherent in democracies, and by the law of armed conflict. They employ sophisticated politi-cal, economic, and military campaigns that com-bine discrete actions. They are patient and con-tent to accrue strategic gains over time—making it harder for the United States and our allies to respond. Such actions are calculated to achieve maximum effect without provoking a direct mil-itary response from the United States. And as these incremental gains are realized, over time, a new status quo emerges.
T e United States must prepare for this t pe of com-petition. China, Russia, and other state and nonstate actors recognize that the United States often views the world in binary terms, with states being either “at peace” or “at war,” when it is actually an arena of continuous competition. Our adversar-ies will not ﬁ ght us on our terms. We will raise our competitive game to meet that challenge, to protect American interests, and to advance our values.
Our diplomatic, intelligence, military, and eco-nomic agencies have not kept pace with the changes in the character of competition. America’s mili-tary must be prepared to operate across a full spec-trum of conﬂ ict, across multiple domains at once.
To meet these challenges we must also upgrade our political and economic instruments to operate across these environments.
Bureaucratic inertia is powerful. But so is the tal-ent, creativity, and dedication of Americans. By aligning our public and private sector efforts we can field a Joint Force that is unmatched. New advances in computing, autonomy, and manufac-turing are already transforming the way we ﬁ ght.
When coupled with the strength of our allies and partners, this advantage grows. The future that we face is ours to win or lose. History suggests that Americans will rise to the occasion and that we can shift trends back in favor of the United States, our allies, and our partners.
Renew Capabilities Given the new features of the geopolitical envi-ronment, the United States must renew key capa-bilities to address the challenges we face.
Military U.S. military strength remains a vital compo-nent of the competition for influence. The Joint Force demonstrates U.S. resolve and commit-ment and provides us with the ability to fight and win across any plausible conflict that threat-ens U.S. vital interests.
The United States must retain overmatch— the combination of capabilities in sufficient scale to prevent enemy success and to ensure that America’s sons and daughters will never be in a fair fight. Overmatch strengthens our diplomacy and permits us to shape the intemational environment to protect our interests.
To retain military overmatch the United States must restore our ability to produce innovative capabilities, restore the readiness of our forces for major war, and grow the size of the force so that it is capable of operating at sufficient scale and for ample duration to win across a range of scenarios.
We must convince adversaries that we can and will defeat them—not just punish them if they at ack the United States. We must ensure the abil-ity to deter potential enemies by denial, convinc-ing them that they cannot accomplish objectives through the use of force or other forms of aggres-sion. We need our allies to do the same—to modem-ize, acquire necessary capabilities, improve read-iness, expand the size of their forces, and affirm the political will to win.
---~O~---

29 Priorit Actions MODERNIZATION: Ensuring that the U.S. military can defeat our adversaries requires weapon sys-tems that clearly overmatch theirs in lethality.
Where possible, we must improve existing systems to maximize retums on prior investments. In other areas we should seek new capa-bilities that create clear advan-tages for our military while posing costly dilemmas for our adversaries. We must elimi-nate bureaucratic impediments to innovation and embrace less expensive and time-intensive commercial off-the-shelf solu-tions. Departments and agen-cies must work with industry to experiment, prototype, and rap-idly field new capabilities that can be easily upgraded as new technologies come online.
ACQUISITION: The United States will pursue new approaches to acquisition to make better deals on behalf of the American people that avoid cost overruns, eliminate bloated bureaucra-cies, and stop unnecessary delays so that we can put the right equipment into the hands of our forces. We must hamess innovative technolo-gies that are being developed outside of the tradi-tional defense industrial base.
CAPACITY: The size of our force matters. To deter conflict and, if deterrence fails, to win in war, the Nation must be able to field forces capa-ble of operating in sufficient scale and for ample duration to defeat enemies, consolidate mili-tary gains, and achieve sustainable outcomes that protect the American people and our vital interests. The United States must reverse recent decisions to reduce the size of the Joint Force and grow the force while modemizing and ensuring readiness.
IMPROVE READINESS: T e United States must retain a ready force that is capable of protecting the home-land while defending U.S. interests. Readiness requires a renewed focus on training, logistics, and maintenance. We must be able to get to a the-ater in time to shape events quickly. This will require a resilient forward posture and agile global mobility forces.
RETAIN A FULL-SPECTRUM FORCE:
The Joint Force must remain capable of deterring and defeat-ing the full range of threats to the United States. The Department of Defense must develop new operational concepts and capa-bilities to win without assured dominance in air, maritime, land, space, and cyberspace domains, including against those operating below the level of conventional military con-flict. We must sustain our competence in irregu-lar warfare, which requires planning for a long-term, rather than ad hoc, fight against terrorist networks and other irregular threats.
Defense Industrial Base A healthy defense industrial base is a critical ele-ment of U.S. power and the National Security Innovation Base. The ability of the military to surge in response to an emergency depends on our Nation’s ability to produce needed parts and systems, healthy and secure supply chains, and a skilled U.S. workforce. The erosion of American manufacturing over the last two decades, how-ever, has had a negative impact on these capa-bilities and threatens to undermine the ability of U.S. manufacturers to meet national security requirements. Today, we rely on single domes-tic sources for some products and foreign supply chains for others, and we face the possibilit of not being able to produce specialized components for
P I L A R I I : P R E S E R V E P E A C E T H R O U G H S T R E N G T H Support for a vibrant domestic manufacturing sector, a solid defense industrial base, and resilient supply chains is a national priorit .
---~O~---

N A T I O N A L S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y 30 the military at home. As America’s manufactur-ing base has weakened, so too have critical work-force skills ranging from industrial welding, to high-technology skills for cybersecurit and aero-space. Support for a vibrant domestic manufactur-ing sector, a solid defense industrial base, and resil-ient supply chains is a national priority.
Priorit Actions UNDERSTAND THE PROBLEM: We will evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of our defense indus-trial base, including the identification of materi-als essential to national security, contingencies that could affect supply chains, and technologies that are likely to be critical for the future.
ENCOURAGE HOMELAND INVESTMENT: The United States will promote policies and incentives that retum key national security industries to American shores. Where possible, the U.S.
Govemment will work with industry partners to strengthen U.S. competitiveness in key technolo-gies and manufacturing capabilities. In addition, we will reform regulations and processes to facili-tate the export of U.S. military equipment.
PROTECT AND GROW CRITICAL SKILLS: The United States must maintain and develop skilled trades and high-technology skills through increased support for technical college and apprentice-ship programs. We will support STEM efforts, at the Federal and state levels, and target national security technology areas.
Nuclear Forces Nuclear weapons have served a vital purpose in America’s National Security Strategy for the past
70 years. They are the foundation of our strat-egy to preserve peace and stability by deterring aggression against the United States, our allies, and our partners. While nuclear deterrence strat-egies cannot prevent all conflict, they are essen-tial to prevent nuclear at ack, non-nuclear strategic attacks, and large-scale conventional aggression.
In addition, the extension of the U.S. nuclear deter-rent to more than 30 allies and partners helps to assure their security, and reduces their need to possess their own nuclear capabilities.
Following the Cold War, the United States reduced investments in our nuclear enterprise and reduced the role of nuclear weapons in our strategy. Some parts of America’s strategic nuclear Triad of bomb-ers, sea-based missiles, and land-based missiles are over 30 years old, and much of our nuclear infra-structure dates to the World War II era. At the same time, however, nuclear-armed adversaries have expanded their arsenals and range of delivery sys-tems. The United States must maintain the credi-ble deterrence and assurance capabilities provided by our nuclear Triad and by U.S. theater nuclear capabilities deployed abroad. Significant invest-ment is needed to maintain a U.S. nuclear arsenal and infrastructure that is able to meet national securit threats over the coming decades.
Priorit Actions SUSTAIN U.S. NUCLEAR WEAPONS: The United States will sustain a nuclear force structure that meets our current needs and addresses unanticipated risks. The United States does not need to match the nuclear arsenals of other powers, but we must sustain a stockpile that can deter adversaries, assure allies and partners, and achieve U.S. objec-tives if deterrence fails.
MODE RNIZE U. S . N UCLE AR FORCES AND INFR A-STRUCTURE: We will modemize our nuclear enter-prise to ensure that we have the scientific, engi-neering, and manufacturing capabilities nec-essary to retain an effective and safe nuclear Triad and respond to future national secu-rity threats. Modemization and sustainment require investing in our aging command and control system and maintaining and growing
---~O~---

31 the highly skilled workforce needed to develop, manufacture, and deploy nuclear weapons.
MAINTAIN STABLE DETERRENCE: To avoid miscalcu-lation, the United States will conduct discussions with other states to build predictable relation-ships and reduce nuclear risks. We will consider new arms control arrangements if they contribute to strategic stability and if they are verifiable. We will not allow adversaries to use threats of nuclear escalation or other irresponsible nuclear behav-iors to coerce the United States, our allies, and our partners. Fear of escalation will not prevent the United States from defending our vital interests and those of our allies and partners.
Space The United States must maintain our leadership and freedom of action in space. Communications and ﬁ nancial networks, military and intelligence systems, weather monitoring, navigation, and more have components in the space domain. As U.S. dependence on space has increased, other actors have gained access to space-based systems and information. Govemments and private sector ﬁ rms have the abilit to launch satellites into space at increasingly lower costs. T e fusion of data from imagery, communications, and geolocation ser-vices allows motivated actors to access previously unavailable information. T is “democratization of space” has an impact on military operations and on America’s abilit to prevail in conﬂ ict.
Many countries are purchasing satellites to sup-port their own strategic military activities. Others believe that the abilit to at ack space assets oﬀ ers an asymmetric advantage and as a result, are pur-suing a range of anti-satellite (ASAT) weapons.
The United States considers unfettered access to and freedom to operate in space to be a vital interest. Any harmful interference with or an attack upon critical components of our space archi-tecture that directly affects this vital U.S. interest will be met with a deliberate response at a time, place, manner, and domain of our choosing.
Priorit Actions ADVANCE SPACE AS A PRIORITY DOMAIN: America’s newly re-established National Space Council, chaired by the Vice President, will review America’s long-range space goals and develop a strategy that integrates all space sectors to support innova-tion and American leadership in space.
PROMOTE SPACE COMMERCE: The United States will simplify and update regulations for commer-cial space activity to strengthen competitiveness.
As the U.S. Govemment partners with U.S. com-mercial space capabilities to improve the resil-iency of our space architecture, we will also con-sider extending national security protections to our private sector partners as needed.
MAINTAIN LEAD IN EXPLORATION: To enable human exploration across the solar system and to bring back to Earth new knowledge and opportuni-ties, we will increase public-private partnerships and promote ventures beyond low Earth orbit with allies and friends.
Cyberspace Malicious state and non-state actors use cyberat-tacks for extortion, information warfare, disinfor-mation, and more. Such at acks have the capabilit to harm large numbers of people and institutions with comparatively minimal investment and a troubling degree of deniability. These attacks can undermine faith and confidence in democratic institutions and the global economic system.
Many countries now view cyber capabilities as tools for projecting influence, and some use cyber tools to protect and extend their autocratic regimes. Cyberattacks have become a key feature of modem conflict. The United States will deter,
P I L A R I I : P R E S E R V E P E A C E T H R O U G H S T R E N G T H
---~O~---

N A T I O N A L S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y 32 defend, and when necessary defeat malicious actors who use cyberspace capabilities against the United States. When faced with the opportunity to take action against malicious actors in cyber-space, the United States will be risk informed, but not risk averse, in considering our options.
Priorit Actions
IM PROVE AT TRIB UTION , ACCOU NTAB ILIT Y, AN D RESPONSE: We will invest in capabilities to sup-port and improve our ability to attribute cyber-attacks, to allow for rapid response.
ENHANCE CYBER TOOLS AND EXPERTISE: We will improve our cyber tools across the spectrum of conflict to protect U.S. Govemment assets and U.S. critical infrastructure, and to protect the integrity of data and information. U.S. depart-ments and agencies will recruit, train, and retain a workforce capable of operating across this spectrum of activity.
I M PROVE I NTEG R ATIO N AN D AG I LIT Y: We will improve the integration of authorities and procedures across the U.S. Govemment so that cyber operations against adversaries can be conducted as required. We will work with the Congress to address the challenges that continue to hinder timely intelligence and information sharing, planning and operations, and the devel-opment of necessary cyber tools.
Intelligence America’s ability to identify and respond to geo-strategic and regional shifts and their political, eco-nomic, military, and securit implications requires that the U.S. Intelligence Community (IC) gather, analyze, discem, and operationalize information.
In this information-dominant era, the IC must con-tinuously pursue strategic intelligence to antic-ipate geostrategic shifts, as well as shorter-term intelligence so that the United States can respond to the actions and provocations of rivals.
The ability of the United States to modemize our military forces to overmatch our adversar-ies requires intelligence support. Intelligence is needed to understand and anticipate foreign doc-trine and the intent of foreign leaders, prevent tac-tical and operational surprise, and ensure that U.S. capabilities are not compromised before they are fielded. In addition, virtually all mod-em weapon systems depend upon data derived from scientiﬁ c and technical intelligence.
T e IC, as well as the law enforcement communit , offer unique abilities to defend against and miti-gate threat actors operating below the threshold of open conflict. Both communities have exception-ally strong liaison relationships throughout the world, allowing the United States to cooperate with allies and partners to protect against adversaries.
Priorit Actions IMPROVE UNDERSTANDING: To prevent the theft of sensitive and proprietary information and main-tain supply chain integrit , the United States must increase our understanding of the economic pol-icy priorities of our adversaries and improve our ability to detect and defeat their attempts to commit economic espionage.
HARNESS ALL INFORMATION AT OUR DISPOSAL: The United States will, in concert with allies and part-ners, use the information-rich open-source envi-ronment to deny the ability of state and non-state actors to attack our citizens, conduct offensive intelligence activities, and degrade America’s democratic institutions.
FUSE INFORMATION AND ANALYSIS: T e United States will fuse our analysis of information derived from the diplomatic, information, military, and eco-nomic domains to compete more effectively on the geopolitical stage.
---~O~---

33 Diplomacy and Statecraft Competitive Diplomacy Across the competitive landscape, America’s dip-lomats are our forward-deployed political capa-bility, advancing and defending America’s interests abroad. Diplomacy catalyzes the political, economic, and societal connections that create America’s enduring alignments and that build positive networks of rela-tionships with partners.
Diplomacy sustains dia-logue and fosters areas of cooperation with compet-itors. It reduces the risk of costly miscommunication.
Diplomacy is indispens-able to identify and imple-ment solut ions to con-flicts in unstable regions of the world short of mili-tary involvement. It helps to galvanize allies for action and marshal the collective resources of like-minded n at ion s a nd orga n i z a-tions to address shared problems. Authoritarian states are eager to replace the United States where the United States withdraws our diplo-mats and closes our outposts.
We must upgrade our diplomatic capabili-ties to compete in the current environment and to embrace a competitive mindset. Effective diplomacy requires the efficient use of limited resources, a professional diplomatic corps, modem and safe facilities, and secure methods to commu-nicate and engage with local populations.
Priorit Actions PRESERVE A FORWARD DIPLOMATIC PRESENCE: Our diplomats must be able to build and sustain rela-tionships where U.S. interests are at stake. Face-to-face diplomacy cannot be replaced by tech-nology. Relationships, developed over time, create trust and shared understanding that the United States calls upon when confronting secu-rity threats, responding to crises, and encour-aging others to share the burden for tackling the world’s challenges. We must enable forward-deployed field work beyond the con-fines of diplomatic facilities, including partnering with military colleagues in con-flict-affected states.
ADVANCE AMERICAN INTERESTS:
In the ongoing contests for power, our diplomats must build and lead coali-tions that advance shared interests and articulate America’s vision in intema-tional forums, in bilateral relationships, and at local levels within states.
Our diplomats need additional flexibility to oper-ate in complex conflict-affected areas.
CATALYZE OPPORTUNITIES: Diplomats must iden-tify opportunities for commerce and coop-eration, and facilitate the cultural, educa-tional, and people-to-people exchanges that create the networks of current and future polit-ical, civil society, and educational leaders who will extend a free and prosperous world.
P I L A R I I : P R E S E R V E P E A C E T H R O U G H S T R E N G T H Diplomacy is indispensable to identif and implement solutions to conﬂ icts in unstable regions of the world short of military involvement. It helps to galvanize allies for action and marshal the collective resources of like-minded nations and organizations to address shared problems.
---~O~---

N A T I O N A L S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y 34 Tools of Economic Diplomacy Retaining our position as the world’s preemi-nent economic actor strengthens our ability to use the tools of economic diplomacy for the good of Americans and others. Maintaining America’s central role in intemational financial forums enhances our security and prosperity by expand-ing a communit of free market economies, defend-ing against threats from state-led economies, and protecting the U.S. and intemational economy from abuse by illicit actors.
We want to create wealth for Americans and our allies and partners. Prosperous states are stron-ger security partners who are able to share the burden of confronting com-mon threats. Fair and recip-rocal trade, investments, and exchanges of knowledge deepen our alliances and partnerships, which are necessary to succeed in today’s competitive geopoliti-cal environment. Trade, export promotion, targeted use of for-eign assistance, and modem-ized development finance tools can promote stability, prosper-ity, and political reform, and build new partnerships based on the principle of reciprocity.
Economic tools—including sanctions, anti-mon-ey-laundering and anti-corruption measures, and enforcement actions—can be important parts of broader strategies to deter, coerce, and constrain adversaries. We will work with like-minded part-ners to build support for tools of economic diplo-macy against shared threats. Multilateral eco-nomic pressure is often more effective because it limits the ability of targeted states to circumvent measures and conveys united resolve.
Priorit Actions
R E I N FO R C E CO N O M I C TI E S W IT H A L LI E S A N D PARTNERS: We will strengthen economic ties as a core aspect of our relationships with like-minded states and use our economic expertise, mar-kets, and resources to bolster states threatened by our competitors.
DEPLOY ECONOMIC PRESSURE ON SECURITY THREATS:
We will use existing and pursue new economic authorities and mobilize intemational actors to increase pressure on threats to peace and security in order to resolve confrontations short of military action.
SEVER SOURCES OF FUNDING: We will deny reve-nue to terrorists, WMD proliferators, and other illicit actors in order to constrain their ability to use and move funds to support hostile acts and operations.
Information Statecraft America’s competitors weap-onize information to attack the values and institutions that underpin free societies, while shielding themselves from out-side information. They exploit marketing techniques to tar-get individuals based upon their activities, interests, opinions, and values. They disseminate mis-information and propaganda.
Risks to U.S. national security will grow as com-petitors integrate information derived from per-sonal and commercial sources with intelligence collection and data analytic capabilities based on Artificial Intelligence (AI) and machine leam-ing. Breaches of U.S. commercial and govem-ment organizations also provide adversaries with data and insights into their target audiences.
America's competitors weaponize information to at ack the values and institutions that underpin free societies, while shielding themselves from outside information.
---~O~---

35
P I L A R I I : P R E S E R V E P E A C E T H R O U G H S T R E N G T H China, for example, combines data and the use of AI to rate the loyalt of its citizens to the state and uses these ratings to determine jobs and more. Jihadist terrorist groups continue to wage ideological infor-mation campaigns to establish and legitimize their narrative of hate, using sophisticated communica-tions tools to at ract recruits and encourage at acks against Americans and our partners.
Russia uses information operations as part of its offensive cyber efforts to influence public opin-ion across the globe. Its inﬂ uence campaigns blend covert intelligence operations and false online per-sonas with state-funded media, third-party intermediaries, and paid social media users or “trolls.” U.S. eﬀ orts to counter the exploitation of informa-tion by rivals have been tepid and fragmented. U.S. eﬀ orts have lacked a sustained focus and have been hampered by the lack of properly trained profes-sionals. The American private sector has a direct interest in supporting and amplifying voices that stand for tolerance, openness, and freedom.
Priorit Actions PRIORITIZE THE COMPETITION: We will improve our understanding of how adversaries gain infor-mational and psychological advantages across all policies. The United States must empower a true public diplomacy capability to compete eﬀ ectively in this arena.
DRIVE EFFECTIVE COMMUNICATIONS: We will craft and direct coherent communications campaigns to advance American inﬂ uence and counter chal-lenges from the ideological threats that ema-nate from radical Islamist groups and competitor nations. T ese campaigns will adhere to American values and expose adversary propaganda and disinformation.
ACTIVATE LOCAL NETWORKS: Local voices are most compelling and effective in ideological competi-tions. We must amplify credible voices and part-ner with them to advance altematives to violent and hateful messages. Since media and Intemet companies are the platforms through which mes-sages are transported, the private sector should lend its creativity and resources to promot-ing the values that inspire and grow a commu-nity of civilized groups and individuals.
SHARE RESPONSIBILITY: The United States will urge states where radicalism thrives to take greater responsibility for countering violent messaging and promoting tolerant and pluralis-tic worldviews.
U P G R A D E , TA I L O R , A N D I N OVAT E : We will reexamine legacy delivery platforms for com-municating U.S. messages overseas. We must consider more cost-effective and efficient ways to deliver and evaluate content consistent with U.S. national security interests.
---~O~---



37
P I L A R I V Advance American Influence “Above all, we value the dignit of every human life, protect the rights of every person, and share the hope of every soul to live in freedom. T at is who we are.”
P R E S I D E N T D O N A L D J . T R U M P | J U LY 2 0 1 7
O ur America First foreign policy cel-ebrates America’s influence in the world as a positive force that can help set the conditions for peace and prosperity and for developing successful societies.
T ere is no arc of history that ensures that America’s free political and economic system will automati-cally prevail. Success or failure depends upon our actions. This Administration has the confidence to compete to protect our values and interests and the fundamental principles that underpin them.
During the Cold War, a totalitarian threat from the Soviet Union motivated the free world to cre-ate coalitions in defense of liberty. Today’s chal-lenges to free societies are just as serious, but more diverse. State and non-state actors proj-ect influence and advance their objectives by exploiting information, democratic media free-doms, and intemational institutions. Repressive leaders often collaborate to subvert free societies and corrupt multilateral organizations.
Around the world, nations and individuals admire what America stands for. We treat people equally and value and uphold the rule of law. We have a democratic system that allows the best ideas to flourish. We know how to grow economies so that individuals can achieve prosperity. These qualities have made America the richest coun-try on earth—rich in culture, talent, opportuni-ties, and material wealth.
T e United States oﬀ ers partnership to those who share our aspirations for freedom and prosperity.
We lead by example. “The world has its eye upon America," Alexander Hamilton once observed. “T e noble struggle we have made in the cause of libert , has occasioned a kind of revolution in human sen-timent. The influence of our example has pene-trated the gloomy regions of despotism.” We are not going to impose our values on oth-ers. Our alliances, partnerships, and coalitions are built on free will and shared interests. When the United States partners with other states, we develop policies that enable us to achieve our goals while our partners achieve theirs.
Allies and partners are a great strength of the United States. They add directly to U.S. politi-cal, economic, military, intelligence, and other capabilities. Together, the United States and our allies and partners represent well over half of the global GDP. None of our adversaries have comparable coalitions.
We encourage those who want to join our com-munity of like-minded democratic states and
---~O~---

N A T I O N A L S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y 38 improve the condition of their peoples. By mod-emizing U.S. instruments of diplomacy and devel-opment, we will catalyze conditions to help them achieve that goal. T ese aspiring partners include states that are fragile, recovering from conflict, and seeking a path forward to sustainable security and eco-nomic growth. Stable, prosper-ous, and friendly states enhance American security and boost U.S. economic opportunities.
We will continue to cham-pion American values and offer encouragement to those struggling for human dig-nity in their societies. There can be no moral equivalency between nations that uphold the rule of law, empower women, and respect individual rights and those that brutalize and suppress their peo-ple. Through our words and deeds, America demonstrates a positive altemative to political and religious despotism.
Encourage Aspiring Partners Some of the greatest triumphs of American state-craft resulted from helping fragile and develop-ing countries become successful societies. These successes, in tum, created profitable markets for American businesses, allies to help achieve favor-able regional balances of power, and coalition part-ners to share burdens and address a variet of prob-lems around the world. Over time, the United States has helped create a network of states that advance our common interests and values.
T is historical record is unprecedented and excep-tional. American support to aspiring partners enabled the recovery of the countries of Westem Europe under the Marshall Plan, as well as the ongoing integration of Central and Eastem Europe into Westem institutions after the Cold War.
In Asia, the United States worked with South Korea and Japan, countries ravaged by war, to help them become successful democracies and among the most prosperous economies in the world.
These achievements were prod-ucts of patient partnerships with those who aspired to build prosperous societies and join the community of democratic states. They resulted in mutu-ally beneficial relationships in which the United States helped states mobilize their own resources to achieve transitions to growth and stabilit . Working with these countries made the United States wealthier and more competitive. This progress illustrates how eﬀ ective foreign assistance programs should reach their natural endpoint.
Today, the United States must compete for positive relationships around the world. China and Russia target their investments in the developing world to expand inﬂ uence and gain competitive advantages against the United States. China is investing bil-lions of dollars in infrastructure across the globe.
Russia, too, projects its influence economically, through the control of key energy and other infra-structure throughout parts of Europe and Central Asia. T e United States provides an altemative to state-directed investments, which often leave devel-oping countries worse off. The United States pur-sues economic ties not only for market access but also to create enduring relationships to advance common political and security interests.
The United States will promote a development model that partners with countries that want prog-ress, consistent with their culture, based on free market principles, fair and reciprocal trade, private T ere is no arc of history that ensures that America’s free political and economic system will automatically prevail. Success or failure depends upon our actions.
---~O~---

39
P I L A R I V : A D V A N C E A M E R I C A N I N F L U E N C E sector activity, and rule of law. The United States will shift away from a reliance on assistance based on grants to approaches that at ract private capital and catalyze private sector activit . We will empha-size reforms that unlock the economic potential of citizens, such as the promotion of formal propert rights, entrepreneurial reforms, and infrastruc-ture improvements—projects that help people eam their livelihood and have the added beneﬁ t of help-ing U.S. businesses. By mobilizing both public and private resources, the United States can help maxi-mize retums and outcomes and reduce the burden on U.S. Govemment resources. Unlike the state-di-rected mercantilism of some competitors that can disadvantage recipient nations and promote dependency, the purpose of U.S. foreign assistance should be to end the need for it. T e United States seeks strong partners, not weak ones.
U.S. development assistance must support America’s national interests. We will prioritize col-laboration with aspiring partners that are aligned with U.S. interests. We will focus on development investments where we can have the most impact— where local reformers are committed to tackling their economic and political challenges.
Within this framework, the United States will also assist fragile states to prevent threats to the U.S. homeland. Transnational threat organiza-tions, such as jihadist terrorists and organized crime, often operate freely from fragile states and undermine sovereign govemments. Failing states can destabilize entire regions.
Across Africa, Latin America, and Asia, states are eager for investments and financing to develop their infrastructure and propel growth. The United States and its partners have opportuni-ties to work with countries to help them real-ize their potential as prosperous and sovereign states that are accountable to their people. Such states can become trading partners that buy more American-made goods and create more predict-able business environments that beneﬁ t American companies. American-led investments represent the most sustainable and responsible approach to development and offer a stark contrast to the corrupt, opaque, exploitive, and low-qual-ity deals offered by authoritarian states.
Priorit Actions:
Developing Countries MOB ILIZE R E SOU RCE S: The United States will modemize its development finance tools so that U.S. companies have incentives to capitalize on opportunities in developing countries. With these changes, the United States will not be left behind as other states use investment and proj-ect finance to extend their influence. In addi-tion, the U.S. Govemment must not be an obsta-cle to U.S. companies that want to conduct business in the developing world.
CAPITALIZE ON NEW TECHNOLOGIES: We will incor-porate innovative technologies in our diplo-matic and development programs. For exam-ple, digital technologies enable millions to access financial services through their cell phones and can connect farmers to markets. Such technol-ogies can reduce corruption, increase transparency, and help ensure that money reaches its intended destination.
INCENTIVIZE REFORMS: The United States will use diplomacy and assistance to encourage states to make choices that improve govemance, rule of law, and sustainable development. We already do this through the Millennium Challenge Corporation, which selects countries that are committed to reform and then monitors and evaluates their projects.
Priorit Actions: Fragile States COMMIT SELECTIVELY: We will give priority to strengthening states where state weaknesses or failure would magnify threats to the American
---~O~---

N A T I O N A L S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y 40 homeland. For instance, engagement in Afghanistan seeks to prevent the reemergence of terrorist safe havens.
WORK WITH REFORMERS: Political problems are at the root of most state fragility. The United States will prioritize programs that empower reform-minded govemments, people, and civil societ . As the United States designs its efforts, inputs from local actors improve the likelihood of enduring solutions, reduce costs, and increase accountabil-ity to the American taxpayer.
SYNCHRONIZE ACTIONS: The United States must use its diplomatic, economic, and military tools simultaneously when assisting aspiring part-ners. We will place a priority on economic support that achieves local and macroeconomic stability, helps build capable security forces, and strengthens the rule of law.
Achieve Bet er Outcomes in Multilateral Forums The United States must lead and engage in the multinational arrangements that shape many of the rules that affect U.S. interests and values.
A competition for influence exists in these insti-tutions. As we participate in them, we must protect American sovereignt and advance American interests and values.
A range of intemational institutions establishes the rules for how states, businesses, and individ-uals interact with each other, across land and sea, the Arctic, outer space, and the digital realm. It is vital to U.S. prosperit and securit that these insti-tutions uphold the rules that help keep these com-mon domains open and free. Free access to the seas remains a central principle of national security and economic prosperity, and exploration of sea and space provides opportunities for commercial gain and scientiﬁ c breakthroughs. T e ﬂ ow of data and an open, interoperable Intemet are insepara-ble from the success of the U.S. economy.
Authoritarian actors have long recognized the power of multilateral bodies and have used them to advance their interests and limit the freedom of their own citizens. If the United States cedes leadership of these bodies to adversaries, oppor-tunities to shape developments that are posi-tive for the United States will be lost. All institu-tions are not equal, however. The United States will prioritize its efforts in those organizations that serve American interests, to ensure that they are strengthened and supportive of the United States, our allies, and our partners. Where existing institutions and rules need modemiz-ing, the United States will lead to update them.
At the same time, it should be clear that the United States will not cede sovereignt to those that claim authority over American citizens and are in con-flict with our constitutional framework.
Priorit Actions
EXERCISE LEADERSHIP IN POLITICAL AND SECURITY BODIES: T e United States will strive for outcomes in political and security forums that are consis-tent with U.S. interests and values—values which are shared by our allies and partners. The United Nations can help contribute to solving many of the complex problems in the world, but it must be reformed and recommit to its founding princi-ples. We will require accountability and empha-size shared responsibility among members. If the United States is asked to provide a disproportion-ate level of support for an institution, we will expect a commensurate degree of influence over the direction and efforts of that institution.
SHAPE AND REFORM INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL AND TRADE INSTITUTIONS: T e United States will continue to play a leading role in institutions such as the Intemational Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank, and World Trade Organization (WTO), but will
---~O~---

41
P I L A R I V : A D V A N C E A M E R I C A N I N F L U E N C E improve their performance through reforms. T ese reforms include encouraging multilateral devel-opment banks to invest in high-qualit infrastruc-ture projects that promote economic growth. We will press to make the WTO a more eﬀ ective forum to adjudicate unfair trade practices.
E N S U R E C O M O N D O M A I N S REMAIN FREE: T e United States will provide leadership and technology to shape and gov-em common domains—space, cyberspace, air, and mari-time—within the framework of intemational law. The United States supports the peace-ful resolution of disputes under intemational law but will use all of its instruments of power to defend U.S. interests and to ensure common domains remain free.
P R O T E C T A F R E A N D O P E N INTERNET: The United States will advocate for open, interoperable commu-nications, with minimal barriers to the global exchange of information and services. T e United States will promote the free flow of data and protect its interests through active engagement in key organizations, such as the Intemet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN), the Intemet Govemance Forum (IGF), the UN, and the Intemational Telecommunication Union (ITU).
Champion American Values The extraordinary trajectory of the United States from a group of colonies to a thriving, industrial-ized, sovereign republic—the world's lone superpower—is a testimony to the strength of the idea on which our Nation is founded, namely that each of our citizens is bom free and equal under the law. America’s core principles, enshrined in the Declaration of Independence, are secured by the Bill of Rights, which proclaims our respect for fundamental individual liberties beginning with the freedoms of religion, speech, the press, and assembly. Liberty, free enterprise, equal justice under the law, and the dignity of every human life are central to who we are as a people.
T ese principles form the foun-dation of our most endur-ing alliances, and the United States will continue to cham-pion them. Govemments that respect the rights of their cit-izens remain the best vehi-cle for prosperity, human hap-piness, and peace. In contrast, govemments that routinely abuse the rights of their citi-zens do not play constructive roles in the world. For example, govemments that fail to treat women equally do not allow their societies to reach their potential.
No nation can unilaterally alleviate all human suffering, but just because we cannot help every-one does not mean that we should stop trying to help anyone. For much of the world, America’s liberties are inspirational, and the United States will always stand with those who seek free-dom. We will remain a beacon of liberty and opportunity around the world.
The United States also remains committed to supporting and advancing religious freedom— America’s first freedom. Our Founders understood religious freedom not as the state’s creation, but as the gift of God to every person and a funda-mental right for our flourishing society.
And it is part of our culture, as well as in America’s interest, to help those in need and those trying to For much of the world, America’s liberties are inspirational, and the United States will always stand with those who seek freedom.
We will remain a beacon of libert and opportunit around the world.
---~O~---

N A T I O N A L S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y 42 build a bet er future for their families. We aid oth-ers judiciously, aligning our means to our objec-tives, but with a firm belief that we can improve the lives of others while establishing conditions for a more secure and prosperous world.
Priorit Actions SUPPORT THE DIGNITY OF INDIVIDUALS: We support, with our words and actions, those who live under oppressive regimes and who seek freedom, indi-vidual dignity, and the rule of law. We are under no obligation to offer the benefits of our free and prosperous communit to repressive regimes and human rights abusers. We may use diplomacy, sanctions, and other tools to isolate states and lead-ers who threaten our interests and whose actions run contrary to our values. We will not remain silent in the face of evil. We will hold perpetra-tors of genocide and mass atrocities accountable.
DEFEAT TRANSNATIONAL TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS:
There can be no greater action to advance the rights of individuals than to defeat jihadist terror-ists and other groups that foment hatred and use violence to advance their supremacist Islamist ide-ologies. We will continue to join with other states to defeat this scourge of all civilized peoples.
E MPOWE R WOME N AND YOUTH : Societies that empower women to participate fully in civic and economic life are more prosperous and peace-ful. We will support efforts to advance wom-en’s equality, protect the rights of women and girls, and promote women and youth empower-ment programs.
PROTEC T R E LIG IOUS FR E DOM AN D R E LIG IOUS MINORITIES: We will advocate on behalf of religious freedom and threatened minorities. Religious minorities continue to be victims of violence. We will place a priority on protecting these groups and will continue working with regional partners to protect minority communities from attacks and to preserve their cultural heritage.
REDUCE HUMAN SUFFERING: T e United States will continue to lead the world in humanitarian assis-tance. Even as we expect others to share respon-sibility, the United States will continue to cata-lyze intemational responses to man-made and natural disasters and provide our expertise and capabilities to those in need. We will support food security and health programs that save lives and address the root cause of hunger and dis-ease. We will support displaced people close to their homes to help meet their needs until they can safely and voluntarily retum home.
---~O~---




45 The Strategy in a Regional Context The United States must tailor our approaches to different regions of the world to protect U.S. national interests. We require integrated regional strat-egies that appreciate the nature and magnitude of threats, the intensit of competitions, and the promise of available opportunities, all in the context of local political, economic, social, and historical realities.
C hanges in a regional balance of power can have global consequences and threaten U.S. interests. Markets, raw materi-als, lines of communication, and human capital are located within, or move among, key regions of the world. China and Russia aspire to proj-ect power worldwide, but they interact most with their neighbors. North Korea and Iran also pose the greatest menace to those closest to them. But, as destructive weapons proliferate and regions become more interconnected, threats become more difficult to contain. And regional balances that shift against the United States could combine to threaten our security.
The United States must marshal the will and capabilities to compete and prevent unfavorable shifts in the Indo-Pacific, Europe, and the Middle East. Sustaining favorable balances of power will require a strong commitment and close cooper-ation with allies and partners because allies and partners magnif U.S. power and extend U.S. inﬂ u-ence. They share our interests and responsibility for resisting authoritarian trends, contesting radi-cal ideologies, and deterring aggression.
In other regions of the world, instabilit and weak govemance threaten U.S. interests. Some gov-emments are unable to maintain security and meet the basic needs of their people, making their country and citizens vulnerable to preda-tors. Terrorists and criminals thrive where gov-emments are weak, corruption is rampant, and faith in govemment institutions is low. Strategic competitors often exploit rather than discour-age corruption and state weakness to extract resources and exploit their populations.
Regions afflicted by instability and weak govem-ments also offer opportunities to improve secu-rit , promote prosperit , and restore hope. Aspiring partner states across the developing world want to improve their societies, build transparent and eﬀ ective govemments, confront non-state threats, and strengthen their sovereignty. Many recog-nize the opportunities offered by market econo-mies and political liberties and are eager for part-nership with the United States and our allies. T e United States will encourage aspiring partners as they undertake reforms and pursue their aspira-tions. States that prosper and nations that tran-sition from recipients of development assistance to trading partners offer economic opportunities for American businesses. And stability reduces threats that target Americans at home.
Indo-Paciﬁ c A geopolitical competition between free and repressive visions of world order is taking place in the Indo-Paciﬁ c region. T e region, which stretches
---~O~---

N A T I O N A L S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y 46 from the west coast of India to the westem shores of the United States, represents the most populous and economically dynamic part of the world. The U.S. interest in a free and open Indo-Paciﬁ c extends back to the earliest days of our republic.
Although the United States seeks to continue to cooperate with China, China is using economic induce-ments and penalties, influ-ence operations, and implied military threats to persuade other states to heed its political and security agenda. China’s infrastructure investments and trade strategies reinforce its geopolitical aspirations.
Its efforts to build and mili-tarize outposts in the South China Sea endanger the free ﬂ ow of trade, threaten the sov-ereignty of other nations, and undermine regional stabil-ity. China has mounted a rapid military modem-ization campaign designed to limit U.S. access to the region and provide China a freer hand there.
China presents its ambitions as mutually ben-eficial, but Chinese dominance risks diminish-ing the sovereignty of many states in the Indo-Pacific. States throughout the region are calling for sustained U.S. leadership in a collective response that upholds a regional order respect-ful of sovereignty and independence.
In Northeast Asia, the North Korean regime is rapidly accelerating its cyber, nuclear, and bal-listic missile programs. North Korea’s pur-suit of these weapons poses a global threat that requires a global response. Continued provo-cations by North Korea will prompt neighbor-ing countries and the United States to further strengthen security bonds and take additional measures to protect themselves. And a nucle-ar-armed North Korea could lead to the prolif-eration of the world’s most destructive weapons across the Indo-Paciﬁ c region and beyond.
U.S. allies are critical to responding to mutual threats, such as North Korea, and preserving our mutual interests in the Indo-Pacific region. Our alliance and friendship with South Korea, forged by the trials of history, is stron-ger than ever. We welcome and support the strong lead-ership role of our critical ally, Japan. Australia has fought alongside us in every signif-icant conf lict since World War I, and continues to rein-force economic and security arrangements that support our shared interests and safeguard democratic values across the region. New Zealand is a key U.S. partner contrib-uting to peace and security across the region. We welcome India’s emergence as a leading global power and stronger strategic and defense partner. We will seek to increase quadrilateral cooperation with Japan, Australia, and India.
In Southeast Asia, the Philippines and Thailand remain important allies and markets for Americans. Vietnam, Indonesia, Malaysia, and Singapore are growing security and economic partners of the United States. The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and Asia-Paciﬁ c Economic Cooperation (APEC) remain centerpieces of the Indo-Paciﬁ c’s regional architecture and plat-forms for promoting an order based on freedom.
Priorit Actions POLITICAL: Our vision for the Indo-Paciﬁ c excludes no nation. We will redouble our commitment to established alliances and partnerships, while expanding and deepening relationships with new Sustaining favorable balances of power will require a strong commitment and close cooperation with allies and partners because allies and partners magnif U.S. power and extend U.S. inﬂ uence.
---~O~---

47
T H E S T R A T E G Y I N A R E G I O N A L C O N T E X T partners that share respect for sovereignt , fair and reciprocal trade, and the rule of law. We will rein-force our commitment to freedom of the seas and the peaceful resolution of territorial and maritime disputes in accordance with intemational law.
We will work with allies and partners to achieve complete, verifiable, and irreversible denuclear-ization on the Korean Peninsula and preserve the non-proliferation regime in Northeast Asia.
ECONOMIC: The United States will encourage regional cooperation to maintain free and open seaways, transparent infrastructure financing practices, unimpeded commerce, and the peace-ful resolution of disputes. We will pursue bilateral trade agreements on a fair and reciprocal basis. We will seek equal and reliable access for American exports. We will work with partners to build a net-work of states dedicated to free markets and protected from forces that would subvert their sover-eignt . We will strengthen cooperation with allies on high-quality infrastructure. Working with Australia and New Zealand, we will shore up frag-ile partner states in the Pacific Islands region to reduce their vulnerability to economic fluctu-ations and natural disasters.
MILITARY AND SECURITY: We will maintain a forward military presence capable of deterring and, if nec-essary, defeating any adversary. We will strengthen our long-standing military relationships and encourage the development of a strong defense net-work with our allies and partners. For example, we will cooperate on missile defense with Japan and South Korea to move toward an area defense capabilit . We remain ready to respond with overwhelming force to North Korean aggression and will improve options to compel denuclearization of the peninsula. We will improve law enforce-ment, defense, and intelligence cooperation with Southeast Asian partners to address the growing terrorist threat. We will maintain our strong ties with Taiwan in accordance with our “One China” policy, including our commitments under the Taiwan Relations Act to provide for Taiwan’s legit-imate defense needs and deter coercion. We will expand our defense and securit cooperation with India, a Major Defense Partner of the United States, and support India’s growing relationships through-out the region. We will re-energize our alliances with the Philippines and T ailand and strengthen our partnerships with Singapore, Vietnam, Indonesia, Malaysia, and others to help them become cooperative maritime partners.
Europe A strong and free Europe is of vital importance to the United States. We are bound together by our shared commitment to the principles of democracy, individual libert , and the rule of law. Together, we rebuilt Westem Europe after World War II and cre-ated institutions that produced stabilit and wealth on both sides of the Atlantic. Today, Europe is one of the most prosperous regions in the world and our most signiﬁ cant trading partner.
Although the menace of Soviet communism is gone, new threats test our will. Russia is using subversive measures to weaken the credibil-ity of America’s commitment to Europe, undermine transatlantic unity, and weaken European institutions and govemments. With its inva-sions of Georgia and Ukraine, Russia demon-strated its willingness to violate the sovereignty of states in the region. Russia continues to intim-idate its neighbors with threatening behavior, such as nuclear posturing and the forward deploy-ment of offensive capabilities.
China is gaining a strategic foothold in Europe by expanding its unfair trade practices and invest-ing in key industries, sensitive technologies, and infrastructure. Europe also faces immediate threats from violent Islamist extremists. Attacks by ISIS and other jihadist groups in Spain, France, Germany, Belgium, the United Kingdom, and
---~O~---

N A T I O N A L S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y 48 other countries show that our European partners continue to face serious threats. Instability in the Middle East and Africa has triggered the movement of millions of migrants and refugees into Europe, exacerbating instabilit and tensions in the region.
T e United States is safer when Europe is prosper-ous and stable, and can help defend our shared interests and ideals. The United States remains ﬁ rmly commit ed to our European allies and part-ners. The NATO alliance of free and sovereign states is one of our great advantages over our com-petitors, and the United States remains commit-ted to Article V of the Washington Treat .
European allies and partners increase our strate-gic reach and provide access to forward basing and overflight rights for global operations. Together we confront shared threats. European nations are contributing thousands of troops to help ﬁ ght jihadist terrorists in Afghanistan, stabilize Iraq, and fight terrorist organizations across Africa and the greater Middle East.
T e NATO alliance will become stronger when all members assume greater responsibility for and pay their fair share to protect our mutual interests, sovereignty, and values.
Priorit Actions POLITICAL: T e United States will deepen collabora-tion with our European allies and partners to con-front forces threatening to undermine our com-mon values, securit interests, and shared vision.
The United States and Europe will work together to counter Russian subversion and aggression, and the threats posed by North Korea and Iran.
We will continue to advance our shared princi-ples and interests in intemational forums.
ECONOMIC: The United States will work with the European Union, and bilaterally with the United Kingdom and other states, to ensure fair and recip-rocal trade practices and eliminate barriers to growth. We will encourage European foreign direct investment in the United States to create jobs. We will work with our allies and partners to diver-sif European energy sources to ensure the energy security of European countries. We will work with our partners to contest China’s unfair trade and economic practices and restrict its acquisi-tion of sensitive technologies.
MILITARY AND SECURITY: The United States ful-fills our defense responsibilities and expects oth-ers to do the same. We expect our European allies to increase defense spending to 2 percent of gross domestic product by 2024, with 20 percent of this spending devoted to increasing military capa-bilities. On NATO’s eastem flank we will con-tinue to strengthen deterrence and defense, and catalyze frontline allies and partners’ efforts to better defend themselves. We will work with NATO to improve its integrated air and mis-sile defense capabilities to counter existing and projected ballistic and cruise missile threats, particularly from Iran. We will increase counter-terrorism and cybersecurit cooperation.
Middle East The United States seeks a Middle East that is not a safe haven or breeding ground for jihadist terrorists, not dominated by any power hostile to the United States, and that contributes to a stable global energy market.
For years, the interconnected problems of Iranian expansion, state collapse, jihadist ideology, socio-economic stagnation, and regional rival-ries have convulsed the Middle East. The United States has leamed that neither aspirations for dem-ocratic transformation nor disengagement can insulate us from the region’s problems. We must be realistic about our expectations for the region without allowing pessimism to obscure our interests or vision for a modem Middle East.
---~O~---

49
T H E S T R A T E G Y I N A R E G I O N A L C O N T E X T e region remains home to the world’s most dan-gerous terrorist organizations. ISIS and al-Qa’ida thrive on instabilit and export violent jihad. Iran, the world’s leading state sponsor of terrorism, has taken advantage of instability to expand its influ-ence through partners and proxies, weapon prolif-eration, and funding. It continues to develop more capable ballistic missiles and intelligence capa-bilities, and it undertakes malicious cyber activ-ities. These activities have continued unabated since the 2015 nuclear deal. Iran continues to per-petuate the cycle of violence in the region, caus-ing grievous harm to civilian populations. Rival states are filling vacuums created by state col-lapse and prolonged regional conflict.
Despite these challenges, there are emerging opportunities to advance American interests in the Middle East. Some of our partners are working together to reject radical ideologies, and key lead-ers are calling for a rejection of Islamist extrem-ism and violence. Encouraging political stability and sustain-able prosperity would contrib-ute to dampening the conditions that fuel sectarian grievances.
For g e n e r a t ion s t h e c on-f lict between Israel and the Palestinians has been understood as the prime irritant preventing peace and pros-perity in the region. Today, the threats from jihadist ter-rorist organizations and the threat from Iran are creating the realization that Israel is not the cause of the region’s problems.
States have increasingly found common interests with Israel in confronting common threats.
Today, the United States has the opportunity to catalyze greater economic and political cooper-ation that will expand prosperity for those who want to partner with us. By revitalizing partner-ships with reform-minded nations and encour-aging cooperation among partners in the region, the United States can promote stability and a bal-ance of power that favors U.S. interests.
Priorit Actions POLITICAL: We will strengthen partnerships, and form new ones, to help advance security through stability. Whenever possible, we will encourage gradual reforms. We will support eﬀ orts to counter violent ideologies and increase respect for the dig-nit of individuals. We remain commit ed to help-ing our partners achieve a stable and prosperous region, including through a strong and integrated Gulf Cooperation Council. We will strengthen our long-term strategic partnership with Iraq as an independent state. We will seek a set lement to the Syrian civil war that sets the conditions for refu-gees to retum home and rebuild their lives in safet .
We will work with partners to deny the Iranian regime all paths to a nuclear weapon and neutralize Iranian malign influence. We remain committed to helping facilitate a comprehensive peace agree-ment that is acceptable to both Israelis and Palestinians.
ECONOMIC: The United States will support the reforms underway that begin to address core inequities that jihadist terror-ists exploit. We will encourage states in the region, including Egypt and Saudi Arabia, to continue modemiz-ing their economies. We will play a role in catalyz-ing positive developments by engaging economi-cally, supporting reformers, and championing the benefits of open markets and societies.
MILITARY AND SECURITY: We will retain the neces-sary American military presence in the region to protect the United States and our allies from ter-rorist attacks and preserve a favorable regional Terrorists and criminals thrive where govemments are weak, corruption is rampant, and faith in govemment institutions is low.
---~O~---

N A T I O N A L S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y 50 balance of power. We will assist regional part-ners in strengthening their institutions and capabilities, including in law enforcement, to conduct counterterrorism and counterinsur-gency efforts. We will help partners procure interoperable missile defense and other capa-bilities to better defend against active missile threats. We will work with partners to neutral-ize Iran’s malign activities in the region.
South and Central Asia With over a quarter of the world’s population, a ﬁ fth of all U.S.-designated terrorist groups, several fast-growing economies, and two nuclear-armed states, South and Central Asia present some of the most complicated national security challenges and opportunities. The region spans the terrorist threats emanating from the Middle East and the competition for power unfolding in Europe and the Indo-Pacific. The United States continues to face threats from transnational terrorists and mili-tants operating from within Pakistan. T e prospect for an Indo-Pakistani military conflict that could lead to a nuclear exchange remains a key concem requiring consistent diplomatic at ention.
U.S. interests in the region include countering ter-rorist threats that impact the security of the U.S. homeland and our allies, preventing cross-border terrorism that raises the prospect of military and nuclear tensions, and preventing nuclear weap-ons, technology, and materials from falling into the hands of terrorists. We seek an American pres-ence in the region proportionate to threats to the homeland and our allies. We seek a Pakistan that is not engaged in destabilizing behavior and a stable and self-reliant Afghanistan. And we seek Central Asian states that are resilient against domination by rival powers, are resistant to becoming jihad-ist safe havens, and prioritize reforms.
Priorit Actions POLITICAL: We will deepen our strategic partner-ship with India and support its leadership role in Indian Ocean security and throughout the broader region. We will press Pakistan to inten-sify its counterterrorism efforts, since no part-nership can survive a country’s support for mil-itants and terrorists who target a partner’s own service members and officials. The United States will also encourage Pakistan to continue demon-strating that it is a responsible steward of its nuclear assets. We will continue to partner with Afghanistan to promote peace and securit in the region. We will continue to promote anti-corrup-tion reform in Afghanistan to increase the legit-imacy of its govemment and reduce the appeal of violent extremist organizations. We will help South Asian nations maintain their sovereignt as China increases its influence in the region.
ECONOMIC: We will encourage the economic inte-gration of Central and South Asia to promote prosperity and economic linkages that will bol-ster connectivity and trade. And we will encour-age India to increase its economic assistance in the region. In Pakistan, we will build trade and investment ties as security improves and as Pakistan demonstrates that it will assist the United States in our counterterrorism goals.
MILITARY AND SECURIT Y: We are committed to supporting the Afghan govemment and security forces in their ﬁ ght against the Taliban, al-Qa’ida, ISIS, and other terrorists. We will bolster the
fighting strength of the Afghan security forces to convince the Taliban that they cannot win on the battlefield and to set the conditions for diplo-matic efforts to achieve enduring peace. We will insist that Pakistan take decisive action against militant and terrorist groups operating from its soil. We will work with the Central Asian states to guarantee access to the region to support our counterterrorism efforts.
---~O~---

51
T H E S T R A T E G Y I N A R E G I O N A L C O N T E X T Westem Hemisphere Stable, friendly, and prosperous states in the Westem Hemisphere enhance our security and benefit our economy. Democratic states con-nected by shared values and economic interests will reduce the violence, drug traﬃ cking, and ille-gal immigration that threaten our common secu-rity, and will limit opportunities for adversar-ies to operate from areas of close proximity to us.
In the last half century, parts of this hemisphere were marred by dictatorships and insurgencies that killed tens of thousands of people. Today, this region stands on the cusp of prosperity and peace, built upon democracy and the rule of law.
U.S. trade in the region is thriving and market opportunities for American goods and services, energy and infrastructure projects, and foreign direct investment continue to expand.
Challenges remain, however. Transnational crim-inal organizations—including gangs and cartels— perpetuate violence and corruption, and threaten the stability of Central American states includ-ing Guatemala, Honduras, and El Salvador. In Venezuela and Cuba, govemments cling to anach-ronistic leftist authoritarian models that con-tinue to fail their people. Competitors have found operating space in the hemisphere.
China seeks to pull the region into its orbit through state-led investments and loans. Russia contin-ues its failed politics of the Cold War by bolster-ing its radical Cuban allies as Cuba continues to repress its citizens. Both China and Russia sup-port the dictatorship in Venezuela and are seek-ing to expand military linkages and arms sales across the region. The hemisphere’s democratic states have a shared interest in confronting threats to their sovereignty.
Canada and the United States share a unique strategic and defense partnership. The United States also has important and deepening rela-tions with key countries in the region. Together, we will build a stable and peaceful hemisphere that increases economic opportunities for all, improves govemance, reduces the power of crim-inal organizations, and limits the malign influ-ence of non-hemispheric forces.
Priorit Actions POLITICAL: We will catalyze regional eﬀ orts to build securit and prosperit through strong diplomatic engagement. We will isolate govemments that refuse to act as responsible partners in advancing hemispheric peace and prosperit . We look forward to the day when the people of Cuba and Venezuela can enjoy freedom and the beneﬁ ts of shared pros-perity, and we encourage other free states in the hemisphere to support this shared endeavor.
ECONOMIC: We will modemize our trade agree-ments and deepen our economic ties with the region and ensure that trade is fair and reciprocal.
We will encourage further market-based economic reforms and encourage transparency to create con-ditions for sustained prosperity. We will ensure the U.S. ﬁ nancial system does not serve as a haven or transit point for criminal proceeds.
MILITARY AND SECURITY: We will build upon local efforts and encourage cultures of lawfulness to reduce crime and corruption, including by sup-porting local efforts to professionalize police and other security forces; strengthen the rule of law and undertake judicial reform; and improve infor-mation sharing to target criminals and corrupt leaders and disrupt illicit trafficking.
---~O~---

N A T I O N A L S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y 52 Africa remains a continent of promise and endur-ing challenges. Africa contains many of the world’s fastest growing economies, which represent poten-tial new markets for U.S. goods and services.
Aspiring partners across the continent are eager to build market-based economies and enhance sta-bilit . T e demand for qualit American exports is high and will likely grow as Africa’s population and prosperit increase. People across the continent are demanding govemment accountability and less corruption, and are opposing autocratic trends. T e number of stable African nations has grown since the independence era as numerous countries have emerged from devastating conﬂ icts and undergone democratic transitions.
Despite this progress, many states face political turbulence and instability that spills into other regions. Corruption and weak govemance threaten to undermine the political benefits that should emerge from new economic opportu-nities. Many African states are battlegrounds for vio-lent extremism and jihad-ist terrorists. ISIS, al-Qa’ida, and their affiliates oper-ate on the continent and have increased the lethal-ity of their attacks, expanded into new areas, and targeted U.S. citizens and interests.
African nations and regional organizations have demon-strated a commitment to confront the threat from jihadist terrorist organizations, but their security capabilities remain weak.
China is expanding its economic and military presence in Africa, growing from a small inves-tor in the continent two decades ago into Africa’s largest trading partner today. Some Chinese prac-tices undermine Africa’s long-term development by corrupting elites, dominating extractive indus-tries, and locking countries into unsustainable and opaque debts and commitments.
The United States seeks sovereign African states that are integrated into the world economy, able to provide for their citizens’ needs, and capable of managing threats to peace and securit . Improved govemance in these states supports economic development and opportunities, diminishes the at raction of illegal migration, and reduces vulner-abilit to extremists, thereby reducing instabilit .
Priorit Actions POLITICAL: The United States will partner with govemments, civil society, and regional organi-zations to end long-running, violent conflicts.
We will encourage reform, working with prom-ising nations to promote effective govemance, improve the rule of law, and develop institutions account-able and responsive to cit-izens. We will continue to respond to humanitarian needs while also working with commit ed govemments and regional organizations to address the root causes of human suffering. If neces-sary, we are prepared to sanc-tion govemment officials and institutions that prey on their citizens and com-mit atrocities. When there is no altemative, we will suspend aid rather than see it exploited by corrupt elites.
ECONOMIC: We will expand trade and commercial ties to create jobs and build wealth for Americans and Africans. We will work with reform-oriented govemments to help establish conditions that can transform them into trading partners and improve We will encourage reform, working with promising nations to promote eﬀ ective govemance, improve the rule of law, and develop institutions accountable and responsive to citizens.
---~O~---

53
T H E S T R A T E G Y I N A R E G I O N A L C O N T E X T their business environment. We will support eco-nomic integration among African states. We will work with nations that seek to move beyond assis-tance to partnerships that promote prosperity.
We will offer American goods and services, both because it is proﬁ table for us and because it serves as an altemative to China’s often extractive eco-nomic footprint on the continent.
MILITARY AND SECURITY: We will continue to work with partners to improve the ability of their secu-rity services to counter terrorism, human traf-ficking, and the illegal trade in arms and natural resources. We will work with partners to defeat terrorist organizations and others who threaten U.S. citizens and the homeland.
---~O~---



55 Conclusion T is National Securit Strategy sets a positive strategic direction for the United States that is meant to reassert America’s advantages on the world stage and to build upon our country’s great strengths. During the Trump Administration, the American people can be conﬁ dent that their securit and prosperit will always come ﬁ rst. A secure, prosperous, and free America will be strong and ready to lead abroad to protect our interests and our way of life.
A merica’s renewed strategic confidence is anchored in our recommitment to the principles inscribed in our found-ing documents. The National Security Strategy celebrates and protects what we hold dear— individual liberty, the rule of law, a democratic system of govemment, tolerance, and opportunit for all. By knowing ourselves and what we stand for, we clarif what we must defend and we estab-lish guiding principles for our actions.
This strategy is guided by principled real-ism. It is realist because it acknowledges the central role of power in intemational poli-tics, affirms that sovereign states are the best hope for a peaceful world, and clearly defines our national interests. It is principled because it is grounded in the knowledge that advanc-ing American principles spreads peace and prosperity around the globe. We are guided by our values and disciplined by our interests.
T is Administration has a bright vision of America’s future. America’s values and influence, underwrit en by American power, make the world more free, secure, and prosperous.
Our Nation derives its strength from the American people. Every American has a role to play in this grand, national effort to implement this America First National Securit Strategy. Together, our task is to strengthen our families, to build up our com-munities, to serve our citizens, and to celebrate American greatness as a shining example to the world. We will leave our children and grandchil-dren a Nation that is stronger, bet er, freer, prouder, and greater than ever before.
---~O~---

N A T I O N A L S E C U R I T Y S T R A T E G Y 56 Notes ——————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————— ——————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————— ——————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————— ——————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————— ——————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————— ——————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————— ——————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————— ——————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————— ——————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————— ——————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————— ——————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————— ——————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————— ——————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————— ——————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————— ——————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————— ——————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————— ——————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————— ——————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————— ——————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————— ——————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————— ——————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————— ———————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————
---~O~---



