National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. De…resident of the Russian Federation of December 17, 1997. N 1300)

09/10/2023, 16:06

We invite you to visit the START website (chronicle of events, printed and online publications, texts of ofﬁcial documents,

network resources on nuclear arms reduction issues) - information is updated daily.

See special section: National Security Concept of the Russian Federation and nuclear policy

National Security Concept of the Russian

Federation

(approved. Decree of the President of the Russian Federation of December

17, 1997. N 1300)

See also the text of the 2000 National Security Concept.

The Concept of National Security of the Russian Federation (hereinafter referred to as the Concept) is a political document reﬂecting a set of ofﬁcially accepted views on the goals and state strategy in the ﬁeld of ensuring the security of the individual, society and the state from extemal and intemal threats of political, economic, social, military, technogenic, environmental, informational and other nature, taking into account available resources and capabilities.
The Concept formulates the most important directions and principles of public policy.
The concept is the basis for the development of speciﬁc programs and organizational documents in the ﬁeld of national security of the Russian Federation.

I. Russia in the world community

Currently, the situation in the intemational arena is characterized primarily by an increase in trends towards the formation of a multipolar world. This is manifested in strengthening the economic and political positions of a signiﬁcant number of states and their integration associations, in improving the mechanisms for multilateral management of intemational political, economic, ﬁnancial and information processes.
While maintaining the importance of military and force factors in intemational relations, economic, political, scientiﬁc, technical, environmental and information factors play an increasingly important role. At the same time, intemational competition is intensifying in order to own natural, technological, information resources and markets.
The formation of a multipolar world will be long. At its current stage, there are still recurrences of attempts to create a structure of intemational relations based on unilateral, including military, military solutions to key problems of world politics.
The pace and directions of the formation of a new structure of intemational relations will also be affected by the growing gap between developed and developing countries.
The current period in the development of intemational relations opens up new opportunities for the Russian Federation to ensure its security, but is associated with a number of threats related to the change in Russia's position in the world and difﬁculties in carrying out intemal reforms.
Prerequisites have been created for the demilitarization of intemational relations, the strengthening of the role of law in the settlement of disputed interstate problems, and the risk of direct aggression against the Russian Federation has been reduced. All this

https://www.armscontrol.ru/start/rus/docs/snconold.htm




National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. De…resident of the Russian Federation of December 17, 1997. N 1300)

09/10/2023, 16:06

opens up fundamentally new opportunities for mobilizing resources to solve the country's intemal problems.
There are prospects for wider integration of the Russian Federation into the world economy, including intemational credit and ﬁnancial institutions - the Intemational Monetary Fund, the Intemational Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development. There is a tendency to strengthen cooperation between Russia and a number of member states of the Commonwealth of Independent States.
Russia's common interests with many states on such intemational security issues as countering the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, resolving and preventing regional conﬂicts, countering intemational terrorism and drug trafﬁcking, solving acute environmental problems of a global nature, including nuclear and radiation security, has expanded. This signiﬁcantly increases the possibility of ensuring Russia's national security by non-military means - through contractual, legal, political, economic and other measures.
At the same time, Russia's inﬂuence on solving cardinal issues of intemational life affecting the interests of our state has signiﬁcantly decreased. In these conditions, the desire of a number of states to weaken Russia's position in the political, economic and military ﬁelds has increased.
Signiﬁcant difﬁculties are associated with the process of creating a model of common and comprehensive security for Europe on principles put forward largely at the initiative of Russia. The prospect of NATO's expansion to the East is unacceptable to Russia, as it poses a threat to its national security. Multilateral mechanisms for maintaining peace and security at both the global (UN) and regional (OSCE, CIS) levels are still not yet effective, which limits our ability to use such mechanisms to ensure Russia's national security interests by political and legal means. Russia is in some isolation from the integration processes taking place in the Asia-Paciﬁc region.
All this is unacceptable to it as an inﬂuential European-Asian power with national interests in Europe, the Middle East, Central and South Asia, and the Asia-Paciﬁc region.
Positive trends in the intemal development of the state and society are still not sufﬁciently stable. The main reason for this is the persistence of crisis phenomena in the Russian economy. Production has decreased and its structure has deteriorated compared to the pre-reform period. Investment and innovation activity is decreasing.
Russia's scientiﬁc and technical lag behind developed countries is growing.
Dependence on imports of food and consumer goods, equipment and technology is increasing. Extemal and intemal public debt is growing. There is an outﬂow of qualiﬁed personnel from the sphere of material production and from the scientiﬁc sphere. The number of man-made emergencies is increasing. The property stratiﬁcation of society is growing, the standard of living of the majority of the population is decreasing. The crime and corruption rate is still high.
The economic, scientiﬁc and demographic potential of the country is decreasing. The markets and raw material base of the Russian industry have narrowed. Despite the unprecedented increase in the share of foreign trade in the gross national product, Russia's integration into the world market often takes place on terms that are not favorable for our country.
Public agreement has not been reached, the process of forming a unifying national idea has not been completed, which determines not only the worldview basis, but also the long-term goals of the development of a multinational Russian society, the main ways and ways to achieve them.
The old defense system has been broken, the creation of a new one is slow. Large

https://www.armscontrol.ru/start/rus/docs/snconold.htm




National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. De…resident of the Russian Federation of December 17, 1997. N 1300)

09/10/2023, 16:06

unprotected sections of the state border of the Russian Federation have appeared.
At the same time, Russia has all the prerequisites to support and strengthen its position as a power capable of ensuring the prosperity of its people and playing an important role in world processes. Russia has signiﬁcant economic, scientiﬁc and technical potential, which determines the country's ability to sustainable development. It occupies a unique strategic position on the Eurasian continent, has signiﬁcant reserves of raw materials and resources. The main institutions of democratic statehood and a multi-established economy have been formed in the country. Measures are being taken to stabilize the economy and create prerequisites for production growth on the basis of industrial restructuring. Russia is one of the largest multinational states, has a centuries-old history and culture, its own national interests and traditions.
All these factors, taking into account the powerful potential of the Russian Federation's nuclear forces, create prerequisites for ensuring reliable national security of the country in the 21st century.

II. National interests of Russia

The national interests of Russia are based on the national heritage and national values of the peoples of the Russian Federation, are provided by the capabilities of the economy, political and military organization of the state, the spiritual, moral and intellectual potential of a multinational Russian society.
The system of national interests of Russia is determined by the totality of the main interests of the individual, society and the state.
At the present stage, the interests of the individual are in the real provision of constitutional rights and freedoms, personal security, in improving the quality and standard of living, in physical, spiritual and intellectual development.
The interests of society include the consolidation of democracy, the achievement and maintenance of social harmony, the increase of the creative activity of the population and the spiritual revival of Russia.
The interests of the state are in the protection of the constitutional order, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Russia, in the establishment of political, economic and social stability, in the unconditional implementation of laws and the maintenance of law and order, in the development of intemational cooperation on the basis of partnership.
The totality of the main interests of the individual, society and the state determines the national interests of Russia in the ﬁeld of economy, in the domestic political, intemational, defense and information spheres, in the social sphere, spiritual life and culture.
Russia's national interests in the ﬁeld of economics are key. A comprehensive solution to the problems related to the implementation of Russia's national interests is possible only on the basis of the sustainable functioning of a diversiﬁed high-tech production capable of providing the leading sectors of the economy with high-quality raw materials and equipment, the army - weapons, the population and the social sphere with consumer goods and services, and foreign trade in competitive export goods.
An extremely important factor is the ability of the economy to provide all citizens with decent conditions and quality of life, the ability to realize their creative forces, spiritual demands and material needs. Poverty as a social phenomenon should be excluded from the life of Russian society. It is necessary to ensure a decent life for veterans, the disabled and the elderly, as well as access to education, culture, medical care, transport, communications, utilities for the entire population.
From the point of view of national interests in the ﬁeld of economy, the most relevant is

https://www.armscontrol.ru/start/rus/docs/snconold.htm




National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. De…resident of the Russian Federation of December 17, 1997. N 1300)

09/10/2023, 16:06

to ensure its functioning in the mode of expanded reproduction, to protect the interests of domestic producers, to increase innovation and investment activity, to constantly monitor the strategic resources of the country, to maintain the scientiﬁc potential that can to assert Russia's independence in strategically important areas of scientiﬁc and technological progress.
The most important condition for the implementation of national interests in this area is the transition of the economy to a model of sustainable development with a certain level of state regulation of economic processes, which guarantees the stable functioning and development of a multi-layered economy and provides a balanced solution of socio-economic problems, problems of environmental conservation in order to meet the needs of present and future generations.
The unity of the economic space, the presence of a large and diverse domestic market are the most important national asset of Russia. Its preservation and development, taking into account the production specialization of the regions, is of consolidating importance for the Russian economy.
In the foreign economic sphere, Russia's national interests are to establish such economic ties for Russian producers that would ensure the realization of the interests of Russian enterprises, contribute to the competitiveness of domestic products, production efﬁciency and economic growth. Russia does not accept power methods in foreign economic activity.
In the domestic political sphere, Russia's national interests are to ensure civil peace, national harmony, territorial integrity, unity of the legal space, stability of state power and its institutions, law and order and to complete the process of formation of a democratic society, as well as to neutralize the causes and conditions that contribute to the emergence of social and interethnic conﬂicts, national and regional separatism.
Harmonization of the interests of the peoples inhabiting the country, establishing their comprehensive cooperation, conducting a responsible and balanced state national policy are the most important tasks, the solution of which will ensure the intemal political stability and unity of Russia. A comprehensive solution to these tasks should form the basis of domestic state policy and ensure the development of the Russian Federation as a multinational democratic federal state.
The national interests of the Russian Federation in the ﬁght against crime and corruption require the consolidation of the efforts of society and the state, a sharp restriction of the economic and socio-political basis of these illegal phenomena, the development of a comprehensive system of measures of a legal, special and other nature for the effective suppression of crimes and offenses, to ensure the protection of the individual, society and the state from criminal encroachments, to create a system of control over the level of crime.
The efforts of society and the state should be aimed at forming a system of effective social prevention measures and educating law-abiding citizens.
The ﬁght against organized crime, corruption, terrorism and banditry should focus on the prevention and suppression of illegal acts, the inevitability of responsibility for any crime and the protection of the right of everyone to personal security, regardless of nationality, nationality, religion, views and beliefs.
National interests in the ﬁeld of spiritual life, culture and science largely determine the course of reforms and their outcome. The spiritual revival of society, its moral values directly affect the level of development of the economy and all spheres of life. It is extremely important to establish the ideals of high morality and humanism in society, the development of centuries-old spiritual traditions of the Fatherland.
The implementation of this requires a state policy that excludes the possibility of damage to Russian culture, ensures the preservation and enhancement of its national

https://www.armscontrol.ru/start/rus/docs/snconold.htm




National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. De…resident of the Russian Federation of December 17, 1997. N 1300)

09/10/2023, 16:06

values and national heritage, and the further spiritual and intellectual development of society.
The national interests of the Russian Federation in the intemational sphere require an active foreign policy course aimed at strengthening Russia's position as a great power - one of the inﬂuential centers of the emerging multipolar world. The main components
of this course are: formation of an integration association of the member states of the Commonwealth of Independent States on a voluntary basis; development of equal partnership with other great powers centers of economic and military power; development of intemational cooperation in the ﬁght against transnational crime and terrorism; strengthening those mechanisms of collective management of world political and economic processes in which Russia plays an important role, and, ﬁrst of all, strengthening the UN Security Council.
Undoubtedly, the priority direction of Russia's foreign policy is and will be activities to ensure the inviolability of borders and territorial integrity of the state, to protect its constitutional order from possible encroachments of other states.
The realization of Russia's national interests in the intemational sphere is largely determined by the nature of relations with the leading powers and integration associations of the world community. The development of equal partnerships with them meets the status of the Russian Federation and its foreign policy interests, is designed to strengthen global and regional security, create favorable conditions for our country's participation in world trade, scientiﬁc, technical, credit and ﬁnancial cooperation.
The national interest of Russia is in the development of dialogue and comprehensive cooperation with the countries of Central and Eastem Europe, America, the Middle East, West Asia, Africa and the Asia-Paciﬁc region. Russia's national interests in the intemational sphere also include the protection of life, dignity, intemationally recognized civil rights and freedoms of Russian citizens and our compatriots abroad.
Russia's national interests in the defense sphere are primarily to ensure the security of the individual, society and the state from military aggression by other states. Ensuring security in the defense sphere requires the concentration of the efforts of society and the state on systematic military construction.
The existing military organization is burdensome for the state. It should be reformed during military construction, which should take into account the changing balance of power in the world stage and effectively use the economic capabilities of the state to ensure an adequate response to military threats to the national interests of the Russian Federation.
Russia's national interests in the information sphere make it necessary to focus the efforts of society and the state on solving such problems as respect for the constitutional rights and freedoms of citizens in the ﬁeld of obtaining and exchanging information, protecting national spiritual values, promoting national cultural heritage, norms of morality and public morality, ensuring the right of citizens to receive reliable information, and developing modem telecommunication technologies. The planned activity of the state to implement these tasks will allow the Russian Federation to become one of the centers of world development in the XXI century. At the same time, it is unacceptable to use information to manipulate mass consciousness. It is necessary to protect the state information resource from the leakage of important political, economic, scientiﬁc, technical and military information.
Russia's national interests are long-term and determine the main goals on its historical path, form strategic and current tasks of domestic and foreign policy of the state, and

https://www.armscontrol.ru/start/rus/docs/snconold.htm




National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. De…resident of the Russian Federation of December 17, 1997. N 1300)

09/10/2023, 16:06

are implemented through the system of public administration.
A necessary condition for the realization of Russia's national interests is the ability to independently solve intemal political, economic and social problems, regardless of the intentions and positions of foreign states and their communities, to maintain a standard of living of the population that ensures national harmony and socio-political stability in the country.

III. Threats to the national security of the Russian Federation

A new geopolitical and intemational situation for Russia, negative processes in the domestic economy, aggravation of interethnic relations and social polarization of Russian society pose a direct threat to the national security of the country.
The crisis state of the economy is the main reason for the threat to the national security of the Russian Federation. It manifests itself through a signiﬁcant reduction in production, a decrease in investment and innovation activity, the destruction of scientiﬁc and technical potential, stagnation of the agricultural sector, disruption of the payment and monetary system, a decrease in the revenue part of the federal budget, and the growth of public debt. An undoubted threat is the increase in the share of the fuel and raw materials sector, the formation of an economic model based on the export of fuel and raw materials and the import of equipment, food and consumption items, which can lead to the conquest of the Russian domestic market by foreign ﬁrms.
These threatening manifestations are characterized by an increase in the export of foreign exchange reserves outside Russia, strategically important raw materials with extremely inefﬁcient or criminal use of proﬁts, an increase in the outﬂow of qualiﬁed personnel and intellectual property from Russia, uncontrolled capital ﬂight, the country's growing dependence on foreign manufacturers of high-tech equipment, underdeveloped ﬁnancial, organizational and information support for Russian exports, and an irrational structure of imports.
The fall of the country's scientiﬁc and technical potential leads to Russia's loss of advanced positions in the world, a decrease in the quality of research in strategically important areas of scientiﬁc and technological progress, the degradation of science-intensive production, a decrease in the technical level of material production, an increase in the likelihood of man-made disasters, Russia's technological dependence on the leading Westem countries and the undermining of the defense potential of the state, makes it difﬁcult to achieve a radical modemization of the national technological base.
The low level of large-scale investment in the Russian economy poses a particular threat. Without large investments in strategic areas of the economy, the economic revival of Russia is impossible.
The threat to Russia's security in the social sphere, as a consequence of the crisis state of the economy, is an increase in the proportion of the population living below the poverty line, the stratiﬁcation of society into a narrow circle of rich and the overwhelming mass of low-income citizens, and the increase in social tension.
The growth of negative manifestations in the social sphere leads to a decrease in the intellectual and productive potential of Russia, a reduction in the population, the depletion of the main sources of spiritual and economic development, can lead to the loss of democratic gains. To eliminate this threat, it is necessary to develop a national social program.
The threat of depletion of natural resources and deterioration of the environmental situation in the country is directly dependent on the level of economic development and the willingness of society to realize the globality and importance of these problems. For

https://www.armscontrol.ru/start/rus/docs/snconold.htm




National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. De…resident of the Russian Federation of December 17, 1997. N 1300)

09/10/2023, 16:06

Russia, this threat is especially great due to the predominant development of fuel and energy industries, the underdevelopment of the legislative framework for environmental measures and their high resource intensity, the absence or limited use of nature-saving technologies, and low environmental culture. There is a growing trend to use the territory of Russia as a place of burial of environmentally hazardous materials and substances, placement of harmful industries on the Russian territory.
The weakening of state supervision and the lack of effective legal and economic mechanisms for the prevention and elimination of emergency situations increase the risk of man-made disasters in all spheres of economic activity.
Negative processes in the economy aggravate the centrifugal aspirations of the constituent entities of the Russian Federation and lead to an increase in the threat of violation of the territorial integrity and unity of the country's legal space.
Ethnoegoism, ethnocentrism and chauvinism, manifested in the activities of a number of national social formations, contribute to the strengthening of national separatism, create favorable conditions for the emergence of conﬂicts on this ground. In addition to increasing political instability, this leads to the weakening of the common economic space of Russia and its most important components - production, technological and transport links, ﬁnancial and banking, credit and tax systems.
Factors that increase the threat of increasing nationalism, national and regional separatism include mass migration and the uncontrollable nature of labor reproduction in some regions of the country. The main reasons for this are the consequences of the collapse of the USSR on national-territorial formations, failures of national and economic policy both in Russia and in the member states of the Commonwealth of Independent States, the spread and escalation of conﬂict situations on national and ethnic grounds.
There is also a purposeful conscious intervention of foreign states and intemational organizations in the intemal life of the peoples of Russia, a weakening of the role of the Russian language as the state language of the Russian Federation.
The adoption by the constituent entities of the Russian Federation of regulatory legal acts and decisions that contradict the Constitution of the Russian Federation and federal legislation is becoming an increasingly dangerous factor erring the common legal space of the country.
The continuing destruction of the single spiritual space of Russia, economic disintegration and social differentiation provoke an increase in tension in the relationship between the regions and the center, posing a clear threat to the federal structure of the Russian Federation.
The threat of criminalization of social relations, which are developing in the process of reforming the socio-political structure and economic activity, is becoming particularly acute. Mistakes made at the initial stage of reforms in economic, military, law enforcement and other spheres of state activity, weakening of the system of state regulation and control, imperfection of the legal framework and the lack of a strong social state policy, a decrease in the spiritual and moral level of society are objective factors contributing to the preservation of crime and corruption.
The consequences of these miscalculations are manifested in the weakening of legal control over the situation in the country, the meming of executive and legislative authorities with criminal structures, their penetration into the management of banking business, large industries, trade organizations and commodity distribution networks.
The criminal world, in fact, challenged the state by entering into open competition with it. Therefore, the ﬁght against crime and corruption is not only legal, but also political.
Due to the large-scale, often conﬂict redistribution of property, the aggravation of the struggle for power on the basis of group, political, ideological and ethno-nationalist

https://www.armscontrol.ru/start/rus/docs/snconold.htm




National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. De…resident of the Russian Federation of December 17, 1997. N 1300)

09/10/2023, 16:06

interests, the threat of terrorism is growing. The weakness of preventive measures to prevent criminal manifestations, legal nihilism, the outﬂow of qualiﬁed personnel from law enforcement agencies increase the impact of this threat on society.
The threat to the physical health of the nation is alarming. Its origins lie in almost all spheres of life and activities of the state and are most clearly manifested in the crisis state of health care systems and social protection of the population, the rapid increase in the consumption of alcohol and narcotic substances.
The consequences of this deep systemic crisis are a sharp reduction in fertility and life expectancy, deterioration of human health, deformation of the demographic and social composition of society, undermining of labor resources as the basis for the development of production, weakening of the fundamental unit of society - the family.
This development of demographic processes causes a decrease in the spiritual, moral and creative potential of society.
Threats to the national security of the Russian Federation in the intemational sphere are manifested through attempts by other states to counteract the strengthening of Russia as one of the inﬂuential centers of the emerging multipolar world. This is reﬂected in actions aimed at violating the territorial integrity of the Russian Federation, including the use of interethnic, religious and other intemal contradictions, as well as in territorial claims with references in some cases to the lack of clear contractual and legal registration of state borders. With their policy, such states seek to reduce the importance of the Russian Federation in solving key problems of the world community and in the activities of intemational organizations. In general, this can lead to limiting Russia's inﬂuence, infringing its most important national interests and weakening its positions in Europe, the Middle East, Transcaucasia and Central Asia.
The threat of the emergence or aggravation of political, ethnic and economic crises in the member states of the Commonwealth of Independent States, which can slow down or destroy the integration process, is of particular importance for our state. It is extremely important for the Russian Federation to establish these countries as friendly, independent, stable and democratic.
Despite the positive changes in the world, threats to the national security of the Russian Federation in the defense sphere remain. Given the profound changes in the nature of the Russian Federation's relations with other leading powers, it can be concluded that the threat of large-scale aggression against Russia is almost non-existent in the foreseeable future. At the same time, attempts at forceful rivalry with Russia cannot be ruled out. The most real threat to Russia in the defense sector is the existing and potential hotbeds of local wars and armed conﬂicts near its state border.
A serious threat is the proliferation of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction, their production technologies and means of delivery, and especially in countries adjacent to Russia or close to it.
At the same time, the range of threats related to intemational terrorism, including the possible use of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction, is expanding.
The threat to Russia's national security in the defense sphere remains the preservation or creation by the major powers (their coalitions) of powerful groups of armed forces in the regions adjacent to its territory. Even in the absence of aggressive intentions against Russia, such groups pose a potential military danger.
NATO's expansion to the East and its transformation into a dominant military and political force in Europe pose a threat to a new split of the continent, which is extremely dangerous in the context of the preservation of mobile strike groups of troops in Europe, nuclear weapons, as well as the lack of effectiveness of multilateral peacekeeping mechanisms.
The technological separation of a number of the world's leading powers and increasing

https://www.armscontrol.ru/start/rus/docs/snconold.htm




National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. De…resident of the Russian Federation of December 17, 1997. N 1300)

09/10/2023, 16:06

their capabilities to create weapons and military equipment of new generations can lead to a qualitatively different stage in the deployment of the arms race.
Threats to the national security of the Russian Federation in the defense sphere also lie in the incompleteness of the process of reforming the military organization of the state, the continuing gap between political attitudes and their implementation in military and military-technical policy, insufﬁcient funding of national defense, the lack of modem approaches to military construction and the imperfection of its regulatory legal framework.
At the present stage, this is manifested in the extreme acuteness of social problems in the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, other troops, military formations and bodies, the critically low level of operational and combat training of troops (forces) and headquarters, the unacceptable fall in the level of stafﬁng of troops (forces) with modem and promising types of weapons and military equipment, and in general - in reducing the state's ability to ensure the security of the Russian Federation.
There is a tendency to increase the threat of intelligence and operational penetration of foreign intelligence into Russia. The objects of their activities are public authorities, political parties and other public associations, banks and other credit organizations, industrial enterprises, research organizations, and the media. The consequences of this activity may be strengthening counteraction to Russia's chosen course, undermining its economy by involving it in unproﬁtable trade and economic transactions, irrational military-technical cooperation, launching research and development work in unpromising areas, drawing Russia into regional conﬂicts and destabilizing the intemal political situation in the country.
The analysis of threats to the national security of the Russian Federation shows that the main ones currently and in the foreseeable future do not have a military orientation, are mainly of an intemal nature and are concentrated in the domestic political, economic, social, environmental, information and spiritual spheres.
The development of qualitatively new relations with the leading states of the world and the practical absence of the threat of large-scale aggression against Russia while maintaining its nuclear deterrent potential make it possible to redistribute the resources of the state and society to solve acute intemal problems as a matter of priority.

IV. Ensuring national security of the Russian Federation

Ensuring the national security of the Russian Federation through joint targeted activities of state and public institutions, as well as citizens involved in identifying, preventing and countering various threats to the security of the individual, society and the state, is a mandatory and indispensable condition for the effective protection of Russia's national interests.
The main activities of the state and society to ensure the national security of the
Russian Federation are: objective and comprehensive analysis and forecasting of national security threats in all spheres of their manifestation; determination of national security criteria and their threshold values, development of a set of measures and mechanisms to ensure national security in the spheres of economy, foreign and domestic policy, public security and law and order, defense, information and spiritual spheres; organization of the work of legislative (representative) and executive bodies of state power of the Russian Federation on the implementation of a set of measures aimed at preventing or reducing threats to national interests;

https://www.armscontrol.ru/start/rus/docs/snconold.htm




National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. De…resident of the Russian Federation of December 17, 1997. N 1300)

09/10/2023, 16:06

maintaining the state's strategic and mobilization resources at the necessary level.
The main goal of ensuring the national security of the Russian Federation is to create and maintain such an economic, political, intemational and military-strategic position of the country that would create favorable conditions for the development of the individual, society and the state and exclude the risk of weakening the role and importance of the Russian Federation as a subject of intemational law, undermining the ability of the state to realize its national interests in the intemational arena.
The most important tasks of ensuring the national security of the Russian Federation
are: the rise of the country's economy, an independent and socially oriented economic course; improvement of the legislation of the Russian Federation, strengthening of law and order and socio-political stability of society, Russian statehood, federalism and local self-govemment; formation of harmonious interethnic relations; ensuring Russia's intemational security by establishing an equal partnership with the leading states of the world; strengthening the security of the state in the defense and information spheres; ensuring the livelihood of the population in a man-made and environmentally friendly world.
The main principles of ensuring the national security of the Russian Federation are: compliance with the Constitution of the Russian Federation and the legislation of the Russian Federation in the implementation of activities to ensure national security; unity, interconnection and balance of all types of security, changing their priority depending on the situation; priority of political, economic, information measures to ensure national security; the reality (taking into account the available resources, forces and means) of the tasks put forward; compliance with intemational law and Russian laws in the implementation of coercive measures (including the use of military force); combination of centralized management of security forces and means with the transfer in accordance with the federal structure of Russia of part of the powers in this area to the state authorities of the constituent entities of the Russian Federation and local self-govemment bodies.
Ensuring security and protecting Russia's national interests in the economic sphere are the main content of the state's policy aimed at raising the economy and pursuing an independent and socially oriented economic course.
The main directions of ensuring the national security of the Russian Federation in the intemal economic activities of the state are the legal support of reforms and the creation of an effective mechanism for monitoring compliance with the legislation of the Russian Federation, the adoption and implementation of the necessary measures to overcome the consequences of the economic crisis, the preservation and development of scientiﬁc, technical and production potential, the transition to economic growth while reducing the level of man-made disasters, increasing the competitiveness of industrial products, and raising the well-being of the people. The transition to a highly efﬁcient and socially oriented market economy should be carried out as a gradual process of forming optimal mechanisms for organizing the production and distribution of a social product in order to maximize the possible growth in the welfare of society and every citizen.
At the same time, such tasks as eliminating deformations in the structure of the Russian economy and overcoming the progressive reduction in the production of products of a

https://www.armscontrol.ru/start/rus/docs/snconold.htm




National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. De…resident of the Russian Federation of December 17, 1997. N 1300)

09/10/2023, 16:06

high degree of processing, supporting industries that are the basis for expanded reproduction, and ensuring employment of the population are brought to the fore.
To do this, it is necessary to strengthen state support for investment and innovation activity, take measures to facilitate the access of enterprises to long-term loans to ﬁnance capital investments, and provide real state support for targeted industrial restructuring programs.
The most important tasks in the ﬁeld of economic security are the advanced development of competitive industries and industries, the steady expansion of the market for high-tech products. To this end, measures should be taken to stimulate the transfer of new military technologies to civilian production, a mechanism should be introduced to identify and support the development of advanced technologies, the development of which will ensure the competitiveness of Russian enterprises in the world market.
This involves the concentration of ﬁnancial and material resources on priority areas of science and technology development, support for leading scientiﬁc schools, stimulation of private capital attraction through the organization of funds and the use of grants, implementation of development programs for territories with a high concentration of scientiﬁc and technical potential, creation of infrastructure with state support that ensures the commercialization of research results with the simultaneous protection of intellectual property at home and abroad, development of a public network of scientiﬁc, technical and commercial information.
The state promotes the formation and development of private entrepreneurship in all spheres where it contributes to the growth of public welfare, creates equal conditions for economic competition of enterprises of all forms of ownership, provides protection of consumer rights, a sufﬁcient level of social guarantees, conditions for the progress of science and education, spiritual and moral development of society, as well as the effective operation of mechanisms of market self-organization. It is necessary to introduce certain restrictions on the activities of foreign banking and insurance companies, on the transfer to the operation of foreign enterprises of deposits of irreplaceable natural resources, telecommunications, transport and distribution networks. Foreign companies should not be allowed to control strategically important sectors of the economy, defense industry and natural monopolies.
It is necessary to develop and implement targeted programs for the economic recovery of depressed regions, the introduction of a preferential regime for economic activities, including preferential tariffs for transportation and communication services that ensure the unity of the country's economic space.
In the context of foreign trade liberalization, it is necessary to protect the interests of domestic producers in the foreign market. The state should resolutely seek to eliminate discriminatory restrictions on the import of Russian products into developed countries of the West, prevent the imposition of political decisions on Russia that cause economic or moral damage to its citizens and enterprises.
An important task in the ﬁeld of foreign trade is to create favorable conditions for the intemational integration of the Russian economy, expansion of markets for Russian products. Further progress is needed along the path of forming a common economic space with the member states of the Commonwealth of Independent States, dismantling trade barriers that have arisen in cooperation with the countries of the former CMEA.
Effective measures should be taken in the ﬁeld of currency regulation in order to create conditions for the termination of foreign exchange settlements in the domestic market and prevent the uncontrolled export of capital. To this end, along with ensuring macroeconomic stabilization, it is necessary to form an effective system of currency control and supervision of compliance with the legislation of the Russian Federation on

https://www.armscontrol.ru/start/rus/docs/snconold.htm




National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. De…resident of the Russian Federation of December 17, 1997. N 1300)

09/10/2023, 16:06

foreign economic activity.
In the intemational ﬁnancial sphere, it is necessary to pursue a balanced credit and ﬁnancial policy aimed at gradually reducing Russia's dependence on foreign credit loans and strengthening its positions in intemational ﬁnancial and economic organizations.
It is fundamentally important to recognize the priority of economic factors in the social sphere as the most important condition for strengthening the state, ensuring the real implementation of social guarantees on the basis of state support, developing mechanisms of collective responsibility and democratic decision-making, social partnership. The most important task is to implement a socially equitable and cost-effective income distribution policy.
The organization of the work of federal executive authorities, executive authorities of the constituent entities of the Russian Federation on the implementation of speciﬁc measures aimed at preventing and overcoming threats to Russia's national interests in the ﬁeld of economy also requires further improvement of the legislation of the Russian Federation and ensuring its strict compliance by all economic entities.
Strengthening the socio-political stability of society is the most important factor in achieving the effectiveness of the measures taken by the state to ensure the national security of the Russian Federation. Along with the economic recovery, the basis of such stability should be public agreement on ways to strengthen federalism and strengthen interethnic relations in the country.
The idea of national and social harmony, expressed through personal, public, corporate, national and social interests, will create additional conditions for the formation of a socially oriented market economy, will become the most powerful tool for combat nationalism, national and regional separatism, and will contribute to the consolidation of society in the interests of Russia's development.
Strengthening the unity and solidarity of the peoples of multinational Russia is the basis for the education of its citizens and should become the most important principle for the development of social relations and modem national culture.
The implementation of the idea of national and social harmony will allow our country to enter a new era as a power that has achieved economic and spiritual progress, has a high growth potential based on the democratic principles of the state structure, intemal harmony of social relations, responsibility for maintaining global stability and sustainable development of human civilization.
Strengthening of Russian statehood, improvement and development of federalism and local self-govemment are the most important tasks, the solution of which will lead to ensuring the national security of the Russian Federation. The main goal in this area is to develop and implement an integrated approach to solving legal, economic, social and ethno-political problems while ensuring respect for the interests of the Russian Federation and its subjects.
The implementation of the constitutional principle of democracy, in which the multinational people exercise their power both directly and through public authorities and local self-govemment bodies, requires the coordinated functioning and interaction of all public authorities, the rigid vertical of executive power and the unity of the judicial system of Russia. This is ensured by the constitutional principle of separation of powers, the establishment of a clearer functional distribution of powers between state institutions, the strengthening of the federal structure of Russia by improving its contractual relations with the constituent entities of the Russian Federation within the framework of their constitutional status.
Strengthening Russian statehood involves increasing the role of the state in the main areas of public life, improving the legislation of the Russian Federation as a universal

https://www.armscontrol.ru/start/rus/docs/snconold.htm




National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. De…resident of the Russian Federation of December 17, 1997. N 1300)

09/10/2023, 16:06

basis for state activity in the context of building a rule of law, ensuring the priority of the Constitution of the Russian Federation and federal laws over other legal acts, forming and developing organizational and legal mechanisms for the prevention of offenses, making and executing state decisions in crisis situations.
The construction of the rule of law largely depends on the correct deﬁnition and clariﬁcation of the subjects of competence and powers of public authorities, speciﬁc types and status of issued regulatory legal acts, the procedure for their change or cancellation, improvement of mechanisms and procedures of relations between the state and society, as well as the procedure for taking into account the interests of the constituent entities of the Russian Federation.
The protection of Russian federalism includes targeted activities to suppress attacks on the state integrity of the country, the system of public authorities, the unity of the legal space of Russia.
The main goal of protecting Russian federalism is to prevent the transformation of federal relations into confederal ones.
The main directions of defense of Russian federalism are: ensuring the priority of federal legislation and improving the legislation of the constituent entities of the Russian Federation on this basis; development of organizational and legal mechanisms for the protection of state integrity, unity of the legal space and national interests of Russia; development and implementation of a regional policy that ensures optimal consideration of federal and regional interests; improving the mechanism for preventing the emergence of political parties and public associations pursuing separatist and unconstitutional goals and suppressing their activities; implementation of a balanced and balanced national policy.
The efforts of society and the state in the ﬁght against crime should be aimed at creating an effective system of counteraction to ensure reliable protection of the interests of the individual, society and the state.
The following tasks become priorities: strengthening the role of the state as a guarantor of national security, creating the necessary legal framework and mechanism for its application; strengthening the law enforcement system; involvement of state bodies within their competence in activities to prevent illegal acts.
The most important condition for the successful ﬁght against all manifestations of crime is transparency. The society has the right to know about decisions and measures taken by public authorities in this area. They should be open, speciﬁc and understandable to every citizen, be proactive, ensure the equality of all before the law and the inevitability of responsibility, and rely on the support of society.
To prevent and combat crime, ﬁrst of all, it is necessary to develop a legal framework as a basis for reliable protection of the rights and legitimate interests of citizens, as well as compliance with Russia's intemational legal obligations in the ﬁeld of combating crime and protecting human rights. It is important to deprive crime of a breeding ground caused by shortcomings in legislation, the crisis in the economy and social sphere. It is necessary to more actively use investigative methods to eliminate corruption links between organized crime.
In order to prevent corruption in the state apparatus and eliminate the conditions for the legalization of criminally acquired capital, an effective system of ﬁnancial control, veriﬁcation of property status, sources of income and expenses of ofﬁcials and other civil servants should be established.
The ﬁght against terrorism, drug trafﬁcking and smuggling is an important part of

https://www.armscontrol.ru/start/rus/docs/snconold.htm




National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. De…resident of the Russian Federation of December 17, 1997. N 1300)

09/10/2023, 16:06

ensuring both the national security of the Russian Federation and the security of the world community as a whole. The crisis situation in society and the economy, the presence of contradictions in interstate and interfaith relations, the imperfection of the regulatory legal framework regulating controversial intemational and regional problems - all this contributes to the emergence of such types of criminal activity on the territory of the Russian Federation and dictates the need to develop a special set of countermeasures.
The ﬁght against terrorism, drug trafﬁcking and smuggling, which are developing into a global intemational phenomenon, should be carried out using the capabilities of all branches of govemment on the basis of extensive cooperation of the special services of the Russian Federation with similar services of other countries at the interstate level.
The main factor in successfully countering these types of crime is the elimination of the causes that give rise to them.
Ensuring the national security of the Russian Federation also includes the protection of cultural, spiritual and moral heritage, historical traditions and norms of public life.
Russia needs to ensure the safety of its great cultural heritage, in particular museum and archival funds, major library collections, historical and cultural objects.
Special attention should be paid to the promotion through the media of the experience of creative and pedagogical schools, cultural and national centers, communities, unions and other institutions, including for children, adolescents, youth and students, as well as the promotion of national cultures of the peoples of Russia, spiritual and moral, historical traditions and norms of public life.
The activities of the Russian Orthodox Church and churches of other faiths play a crucial role in the preservation of traditional spiritual values. At the same time, it is necessary to take into account the destructive role of various religious sects that cause signiﬁcant damage to the spiritual life of Russian society, pose a direct threat to the life and health of Russian citizens and are often used to cover up illegal activities.
The spiritual revival of society is impossible without increasing the role of the Russian language. Its proclamation of the state language and the language of interstate communication of the peoples of Russia and the member states of the Commonwealth of Independent States is the most important factor in the unity of the people of multinational Russia.
In order to ensure the preservation and development of our cultural and spiritual heritage, it is necessary to create optimal economic conditions for the implementation of the most important creative activities.
Ensuring the national security of the Russian Federation in the ﬁeld of protection and strengthening of citizens' health involves increasing the attention of society, legislative (representative) and executive bodies of state power of the Russian Federation to the development of state (federal and municipal) insurance and private medical care, the implementation of state protectionism in the domestic medical and pharmaceutical industry, priority ﬁnancing of health care and federal programs in the ﬁeld of sanitation and epidemiology, child health protection, emergency medical care, disaster medicine.
Ensuring the national security of the Russian Federation in the environmental sphere is becoming a relevant area of activity of the state and society. Priority areas in the ﬁeld of
environmental safety include: combating environmental pollution by improving the safety of technologies related to the disposal and disposal of toxic industrial and domestic waste; ﬁght against radioactive contamination; creation of environmentally friendly technologies; rational use of natural resources.
Since solving environmental safety problems requires signiﬁcant resources, it is

https://www.armscontrol.ru/start/rus/docs/snconold.htm




National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. De…resident of the Russian Federation of December 17, 1997. N 1300)

09/10/2023, 16:06

necessary to implement stable ﬁnancing, the sources of which should be included in budgets at all levels.
To improve the efﬁciency of environmental activities, urgent measures are required, including the adoption of legislative acts providing the legal basis for environmental safety, organizational and administrative measures aimed at improving environmental management in the country, environmental expertise of all programs and projects developed at the federal and regional levels.
The implementation of foreign policy aimed at approving equal partnership between the countries of the world community and intensifying their cooperation is an important part of ensuring the national security of the Russian Federation.
Russia does not intend to enter into confrontation with any state or union of states, does not pursue hegemonic or expansionist goals. As an inﬂuential European-Asian power, it will maintain partnerships with all interested countries of the world community.
Priority in the foreign policy of the Russian Federation is given to ensuring the most important national interests, developing Russia's relations with the leading states of the world, comprehensive cooperation and integration within the framework of the Commonwealth of Independent States, establishing effective bilateral and multilateral cooperation within the framework of the Union of Belarus and Russia, as well as with the parties to the Treaty between the Russian Federation. The Republic of Belarus, the Republic of Kazakhstan and the Kyrgyz Republic on deepening integration in the economic and humanitarian ﬁelds.
Deepening and developing relations with the member states of the Commonwealth of Independent States is the most important factor contributing to the settlement of ethno-political and interethnic conﬂicts, ensuring socio-political stability on the borders of Russia and ultimately preventing centrifugal phenomena in Russia itself.
Russia is also interested in full participation in world, European and Asian economic and political structures. Therefore, striving for mutually beneﬁcial cooperation, the Russian Federation will continue to develop a constructive partnership with the United States of America, the European Union, China, Japan, India and other states. This meets the political and economic interests of the Russian Federation and will provide an opportunity for the full inclusion of Russia in all organizations and institutions of collective management of global political processes.
An indispensable condition for the implementation of Russia's foreign policy efforts should be the creation of a 21st century model for ensuring global, regional and subregional security based on the principle of equality and indivisible security for all.
This implies the creation of a fundamentally new system of Euro-Atlantic security, in which the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe plays a coordinating role; increasing efforts to create multilateral structures that ensure cooperation in the ﬁeld of intemational security in the Asia-Paciﬁc region and South Asia; active participation of Russia as a permanent member of the UN Security Council in the settlement and prevention of regional crises and conﬂicts; further improvement of the regime of intemational control over arms and non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery; ﬁrm protection of the legitimate rights and interests of Russian citizens living abroad, in strict accordance with intemational law.
An important area of activity of the Russian Federation to ensure its national security in the foreign policy sphere is to promote the settlement of regional and local conﬂicts through peacekeeping activities. At the same time, it is necessary to strive to maximize the use of collective efforts in this direction of the Commonwealth of Independent States, the United Nations, and in the future the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Russia will ﬁrmly and consistently fulﬁll its obligations in the ﬁeld of reduction and

https://www.armscontrol.ru/start/rus/docs/snconold.htm




National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. De…resident of the Russian Federation of December 17, 1997. N 1300)

09/10/2023, 16:06

elimination of weapons of mass destruction, conventional weapons, implement conﬁdence-building and stability measures, ensure intemational control over the supply of military and dual-use technologies, as well as promote the establishment of zones free of weapons of mass destruction.
The Russian Federation will also focus its efforts to ensure national security in the foreign policy sphere on solving the problems of intemational and economic cooperation, and above all in terms of strengthening its positions in intemational ﬁnancial and economic organizations.
Ensuring the national security of the Russian Federation in the defense sphere is the most important activity of the state, the subject of constant public attention. The main goal of the practical activities of the state and society in this area is to improve the military organization of the Russian Federation to ensure the possibility of adequate response to threats that may arise in the XXI century, at a rational cost of national defense.
The nature of these threats requires clarifying the tasks of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, other troops, military formations and bodies, optimizing their structure and composition, expanding their professional core, improving the legal framework and planning mechanism for military construction, as well as developing modem approaches to its economic and ﬁnancial support, taking into account the need to form a collective security system within the Commonwealth of Independent States.
Russia does not seek to maintain parity in armaments and armed forces with the leading states of the world and is guided by the implementation of the principle of realistic deterrence, which is based on the determination to adequately use the available military power to prevent aggression. To prevent war and armed conﬂicts, the Russian Federation prefers political, economic and other non-military means. However, until the non-use of force has become the norm of intemational relations, the national interests of the Russian Federation require sufﬁcient military power for its defense.
The Armed Forces of the Russian Federation are the basis of the military organization of the state. They play a major role in ensuring the national security of the Russian Federation by force.
The most important task of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation is to ensure nuclear deterrence in order to prevent both nuclear and conventional large-scale or regional war, as well as the implementation of allied obligations.
To perform this task, the Russian Federation must have the capacity of nuclear forces capable of guaranteeing the cause of damage to any aggressor state or coalition of states.
Protection of national interests of the state involves a comprehensive counteraction to military threats on a regional and local scale. The armed forces of the Russian Federation with the combat composition of peacetime should be able to provide reliable protection of the country from aerospace attack and to solve problems to repel aggression in a local war, as well as to deploy a group of troops (forces) to solve problems in a regional war. At the same time, the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation should ensure that the Russian Federation conducts peacekeeping activities both independently and as part of intemational organizations.
The interests of ensuring Russia's national security and the evolution of the geopolitical situation in the world predetermine, under appropriate circumstances, the need for Russia's military presence in some strategically important regions of the world. The deployment there on a contractual basis and on the principles of partnership of limited military contingents (military bases) should demonstrate the readiness of the Russian Federation to fulﬁll its allied obligations, contribute to the formation of a stable military-strategic balance of forces in the regions and provide the Russian Federation

https://www.armscontrol.ru/start/rus/docs/snconold.htm




National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. De…resident of the Russian Federation of December 17, 1997. N 1300)

09/10/2023, 16:06

with the opportunity to respond to the crisis situation at the initial stage of its inception.
The long-term goals of ensuring the national security of the Russian Federation determine the need for Russia's broad participation in peacekeeping operations. The implementation of such operations should be the most important means of preventing or eliminating crisis situations at the stage of their inception and development.
Ensuring the national security of the Russian Federation in the defense sector involves its participation in the treaty process for the reduction of nuclear and conventional weapons, control over the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery.
The most important direction of ensuring the national security of the Russian Federation in the defense sphere is to clarify and optimize the tasks of the national security system. Priority in solving the tasks of preventing and parrying intemal threats to the national security of the Russian Federation belongs to the Ministry of Intemal Affairs of the Russian Federation, the Federal Security Service of the Russian Federation, the Ministry of the Russian Federation for Civil Defense, Emergencies and Elimination of Consequences of Natural Disasters, in which it is necessary to have the appropriate forces, means and bodies capable of performing special tasks.
The restructuring of the military-industrial potential with minimal losses for new technologies and scientiﬁc and technical capabilities, the consolidation of companies that are developers and manufacturers of weapons and the most important types of civilian products, and the creation of world-class corporations and ﬁrms on their basis, the support and development of research and development, the modemization of weapons and military equipment, the introduction into practice of a system of orders for weapons and military equipment that meets modem requirements should be aimed at improving the military-industrial complex in the interests of ensuring national security of the Russian Federation.
It is also necessary to improve cooperation in the military-technical sphere, which will give Russia the opportunity to represent its interests in new intemational markets.
In ensuring the national security of the Russian Federation in the defense sphere, the human factor and the social status of a serviceman play a special role. Therefore, such tasks as the implementation of a set of measures for the social protection of military personnel, increasing the prestige of military service, the formation of public consciousness in the spirit of the need for armed protection of the national interests of the country and the mobilization of efforts and capabilities of the state, society and citizens for military reform are brought to the fore.
The Russian Federation is considering the possibility of using military force to ensure its national security, based on the following principles:
Russia reserves the right to use all forces and means at its disposal, including nuclear weapons, if the outbreak of armed aggression poses a threat to the very existence of the Russian Federation as an independent sovereign state; the use of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation should be carried out decisively, consistently and systematically, until the creation of favorable conditions for the conclusion of peace for the Russian Federation; the use of military force should be carried out on a legal basis and only when all nonmilitary crisis resolution measures have been exhausted or proved ineffective; the use of military force against civilians or to achieve domestic political goals is not allowed. At the same time, in relation to illegal armed groups that pose a threat to the national interests of the Russian Federation, joint actions of certain units of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation with other troops, military formations and bodies are allowed in strict accordance with the Constitution of the Russian Federation and federal laws; the participation of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation in wars and

https://www.armscontrol.ru/start/rus/docs/snconold.htm




National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. De…resident of the Russian Federation of December 17, 1997. N 1300)

09/10/2023, 16:06

armed conﬂicts of varying intensity and scale should be carried out to solve priority military-political and military-strategic tasks that meet the national interests of Russia, as well as its allied obligations.
The most important condition for ensuring the national security of the Russian Federation in the defense sphere should be the targeted allocation of budget funds for the program development of forces, means and bodies that protect the national interests of Russia by force.
Of particular importance for ensuring the national security of the Russian Federation are the timely detection of threats and the identiﬁcation of their sources. This is achieved by continuous monitoring, with the coordinating role of the Foreign Intelligence Service of the Russian Federation, of political, military, economic, information, technological, social and other extemal threats that affect the national security of the Russian Federation, the state and combat readiness of its Armed Forces, other troops, military formations and bodies. The importance of counterintelligence activities in ensuring the national security of the Russian Federation is also increasing.
The geopolitical position of Russia, the scale of its territory are of particular importance in solving problems related to ensuring the national interests and security of the Russian Federation in the ﬁeld of protection and protection of its state border. To do this, it is necessary to unite the efforts of all federal executive bodies with the coordinating role of the Federal Border Service of the Russian Federation.
Ensuring the national interests and security of the Russian Federation on its state border and in the border space involves the improvement of the intemational legal registration of the state border of the Russian Federation, the development of interstate border cooperation and the implementation of collective security at the extemal borders of the member states of the Commonwealth of Independent States.
The increase in the number and expansion of man-made and natural emergencies, resulting in signiﬁcant material and human losses, often comparable to losses in armed conﬂicts, make the problem of ensuring the national security of the Russian Federation in the natural, man-made and environmental spheres extremely urgent. In this regard, the qualitative improvement of the uniﬁed state system of prevention and liquidation of emergency situations, its further integration with similar systems of the member states of the Commonwealth of Independent States are of particular importance.
In modem conditions of universal informatization and development of information technologies, the importance of ensuring the national security of the Russian Federation in the information sphere is sharply increasing.
The most important tasks here are: establishing the necessary balance between the need for free exchange of information and permissible restrictions on its dissemination; improvement of the information structure, acceleration of the development of new information technologies and their wide dissemination, uniﬁcation of means of search, collection, storage, processing and analysis of information, taking into account Russia's entry into the global information infrastructure; development of an appropriate regulatory legal framework and coordination, with the leading role of the Federal Agency for Govemment Communications and Information under the President of the Russian Federation, of the activities of federal public authorities and other bodies that solve the problems of ensuring information security; development of the domestic industry of telecommunications and information means, their priority distribution in the domestic market compared to foreign analogues; protection of the state information resource, and primarily in federal public authorities and defense complex enterprises.
The system of ensuring the national security of the Russian Federation is created and

https://www.armscontrol.ru/start/rus/docs/snconold.htm




National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. De…resident of the Russian Federation of December 17, 1997. N 1300)

09/10/2023, 16:06

developed in accordance with the Constitution of the Russian Federation, federal laws, decrees and orders of the President of the Russian Federation, decisions of the Security Council of the Russian Federation, resolutions and orders of the Govemment of the Russian Federation, federal programs in this area.
The basis of the system of ensuring the national security of the Russian Federation is the bodies, forces and means of ensuring national security, implementing measures of a political, legal, organizational, economic, military and other nature aimed at ensuring the security of the individual, society and the state.
The powers of the bodies and forces to ensure the national security of the Russian Federation, their composition and structure are determined by the relevant legislative acts of the Russian Federation. It is not allowed to create national security bodies and forces of the Russian Federation that are not established by federal laws, as well as the use of illegal means of ensuring national security.
Of particular importance in ensuring the national security of the Russian Federation is the organization of a system of preparation and adoption of proactive decisions to protect the national interests of the country.
The following participate in the deﬁnition and implementation of the national security
policy of the Russian Federation:
The President of the Russian Federation - directs, within the limits of his constitutional powers, the bodies and forces to ensure national security of the Russian Federation; authorizes actions to ensure national security in various spheres; in accordance with the legislation of the Russian Federation, forms, reorganizes and abolishes subordinate bodies and forces of national security; makes messages, appeals and directives on national security issues;
The Federation Council and the State Duma of the Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation - on the basis of the Constitution of the Russian Federation and taking into account the Concept of National Security of the Russian Federation form a legislative framework in this area: within their competence, take decisions on the use of forces and means of ensuring national security, the use of military force; consider and adopt federal laws on the ratiﬁcation and denunciation of intemational treaties of the Russian Federation in the ﬁeld of national security;
The Govemment of the Russian Federation - ensures the implementation of the National Security Concept of the Russian Federation, the implementation of targeted federal programs, plans and directives in the ﬁeld of national security; implements measures to provide ﬁnancial and material resources to the forces, means and national security bodies of the Russian Federation; manages the activities of the federal executive bodies subordinate to it and, within the powers transferred to it, coordinates the activities of the executive authorities of the constituent entities of the Russian Federation;
The Security Council of the Russian Federation - considers strategic problems of intemal, foreign and military policy of the Russian Federation, issues of ensuring security in the economic, public, defense, border, information, environmental and other spheres, public health protection, forecasting and prevention of interethnic and social conﬂicts, emergency situations and overcoming their consequences, ensuring public consent, legality and order; prepares recommendations and proposals for the development of the National Security Concept of the Russian Federation, on the implementation of the strategy and current policy of ensuring national security; coordinates the activities of the national security system of the Russian Federation to develop a strategy in the ﬁeld of intemal, foreign and military policy, military-technical cooperation and information security, monitors the implementation by federal executive

https://www.armscontrol.ru/start/rus/docs/snconold.htm




National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. De…resident of the Russian Federation of December 17, 1997. N 1300)

09/10/2023, 16:06

authorities and by the executive authorities of the constituent entities of the Russian Federation, the strategy and current policy in these areas.
The Security Council of the Russian Federation is responsible to the President of the Russian Federation for the timely identiﬁcation of threats to the national security of the Russian Federation, for the preparation of operational decisions to prevent emergency situations and the development of the main directions of the national security strategy of the Russian Federation; federal executive bodies - ensure compliance with the legislation of the Russian Federation, implementation of decisions of the President of the Russian Federation, the Govemment of the Russian Federation and the Security Council of the Russian Federation, federal programs, plans and directives in the ﬁeld of national security of the Russian Federation; within their competence, develop regulatory legal acts to ensure national security and submit them to the Security Council of the Russian Federation; state authorities of the constituent entities of the Russian Federation interact with federal executive authorities in order to ensure compliance with the legislation of the Russian Federation, implementation of decisions of the President of the Russian Federation, the Govemment of the Russian Federation and the Security Council of the Russian Federation, federal programs and plans in the ﬁeld of national security; together with local self-govemment bodies, carry out measures to attract citizens, public associations and other organizations to assist in ensuring national security in accordance with the legislation of the Russian Federation; submit proposals to federal bodies of state power to improve the national security of the Russian Federation.
The President of the Russian Federation, the Federation Council and the State Duma of the Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation, the Govemment of the Russian Federation, the Security Council of the Russian Federation, federal bodies of state power, bodies of state power of the constituent entities of the Russian Federation and bodies of local self-govemment act within their powers and coordinate efforts to ensure the national security of the Russian Federation.
In the event of an immediate threat to the national security of the Russian Federation, the Security Council of the Russian Federation shall develop the necessary proposals for decision-making.

* * *

The Russian Federation intends to resolutely and ﬁrmly strengthen its national security, relying on both historical experience and the positive experience of the country's democratic development. The established legal democratic institutions, the established structure of the state authorities of the Russian Federation, the wide participation of political parties and public associations in the development of a strategy to ensure national security make it possible to ensure the national security of the Russian Federation and its progressive development in the XXI century.
As Russia progressively develops, the formation and strengthening of a new system of intemational relations based on equal partnership, certain provisions of the National Security Concept of the Russian Federation are supplemented, clariﬁed and speciﬁed in the annual messages of the President of the Russian Federation to the Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation.

https://www.armscontrol.ru/start/rus/docs/snconold.htm



