09/10/2023, 16:05 National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. De…he President of the Russian Federation of January 10, 2000. N 24)
 https://www.armscontrol.ru/start/rus/docs/sncon00.htm We invite you to visit the START website (chronicle of events, printed and online publications, texts of ofﬁcial documents, network resources on nuclear arms reduction issues) - information is updated daily.
See special section: National Security Concept of the Russian Federation and nuclear policy National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. Decree of the President of the Russian Federation of January
10, 2000. N 24) See also the text of the 1997 National Security Concept.
The Concept of National Security of the Russian Federation (hereinafter referred to as the Concept) is a system of views on ensuring the security of individuals, society and the state in the Russian Federation from extemal and intemal threats in all spheres of life. The Concept formulates the most important directions of state policy of the Russian Federation.
The national security of the Russian Federation is understood as the security of its multinational people as the bearer of sovereignty and the only source of power in the Russian Federation.

I. Russia in the world community The situation in the world is characterized by a dynamic transformation of the system of intemational relations. After the end of the era of bipolar confrontation, two mutually exclusive trends prevailed.
The ﬁrst trend is manifested in strengthening the economic and political positions of a signiﬁcant number of states and their integration associations, in improving the mechanisms of multilateral management of intemational processes. At the same time, economic, political, scientiﬁc, technical, environmental and informational factors play an increasing role. Russia will contribute to the formation of the ideology of the formation of a multipolar world on this basis.
The second trend is manifested through attempts to create a structure of intemational relations based on the dominance of the intemational community of developed Westem countries under the leadership of the United States and designed for unilateral, primarily military-force, solutions to key problems of world politics, bypassing the fundamental norms of intemational law.
The formation of intemational relations is accompanied by competition, as well as the desire of a number of states to strengthen their inﬂuence on world politics, including through the creation of weapons of mass destruction. The importance of military and force aspects in intemational relations continues to be signiﬁcant.
Russia is one of the largest countries in the world with a centuries-old history and rich

09/10/2023, 16:05 National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. De…he President of the Russian Federation of January 10, 2000. N 24)
 https://www.armscontrol.ru/start/rus/docs/sncon00.htm cultural traditions. Despite the difﬁcult intemational situation and intemal difﬁculties, due to its signiﬁcant economic, scientiﬁc, technical and military potential, its unique strategic position on the Eurasian continent, objectively continues to play an important role in world processes.
In the future - wider integration of the Russian Federation into the world economy, expansion of cooperation with intemational economic and ﬁnancial institutions. The common interests of Russia and the interests of other states on many issues of intemational security are objectively preserved, including countering the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, preventing and resolving regional conﬂicts, combating intemational terrorism and drug trafﬁcking, solving acute environmental problems of a global nature, including the problems of nuclear and radiation safety.
At the same time, the efforts of a number of states aimed at weakening Russia's positions in political, economic, military and other ﬁelds are being intensiﬁed. Attempts to ignore Russia's interests in solving major problems of intemational relations, including conﬂict situations, can undermine intemational security, stability, slow down the ongoing positive changes in intemational relations.
In many countries, including the Russian Federation, the problem of terrorism, which has a transnational nature and threatens stability in the world, has sharply escalated, which makes it necessary to unite the efforts of the entire intemational community, improve the effectiveness of existing forms and methods of combating this threat, and take urgent measures to neutralize it.

II. National interests of Russia The national interests of Russia are a set of balanced interests of the individual, society and the state in the economic, domestic political, social, intemational, information, military, border, environmental and other spheres. They are long-term in nature and determine the main goals, strategic and current tasks of the domestic and foreign policy of the state.
National interests are provided by public authorities that carry out their functions, including in cooperation with public organizations operating on the basis of the Constitution of the Russian Federation and the legislation of the Russian Federation.
The interests of the individual are in the realization of constitutional rights and freedoms, in ensuring personal security, in improving the quality and standard of living, in the physical, spiritual and intellectual development of a person and a citizen.
The interests of society are in the consolidation of democracy, in the creation of a legal, social state, in the achievement and maintenance of social harmony, in the spiritual renewal of Russia.
The interests of the state are inviolability of the constitutional order, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Russia, political, economic and social stability, unconditional provision of law and maintenance of law and order, development of equal and mutually beneﬁcial intemational cooperation.
The realization of Russia's national interests is possible only on the basis of sustainable economic development. Therefore, Russia's national interests in this area are key.

09/10/2023, 16:05 National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. De…he President of the Russian Federation of January 10, 2000. N 24)
 https://www.armscontrol.ru/start/rus/docs/sncon00.htm In the domestic political sphere, Russia's national interests are to preserve the stability of the constitutional system, institutions of state power, to ensure civil peace and national harmony, territorial integrity, unity of legal space, law and order and to complete the process of formation of a democratic society, as well as to neutralize the causes and conditions that contribute to the emergence of political and religious extremism, ethno-separatism and their consequences - social, interethnic and religious conﬂicts, terrorism.
Russia's national interests in the social sphere are to ensure a high standard of living for the people.
National interests in the spiritual sphere consist in preserving and strengthening the moral values of society, traditions of patriotism and humanism, cultural and scientiﬁc potential of the country.
Russia's national interests in the intemational sphere are to ensure sovereignty, strengthen Russia's positions as a great power - one of the inﬂuential centers of the multipolar world, to develop equal and mutually beneﬁcial relations with all countries and integration associations, primarily with the member states of the Commonwealth of Independent States and traditional partners of Russia, in the widespread observance of human rights and freedoms and the inadmissibility of the application of double standards.
The national interests of Russia in the information sphere are in the observance of the constitutional rights and freedoms of citizens in the ﬁeld of obtaining and using information, in the development of modem telecommunication technologies, in the protection of state information resources from unauthorized access.
Russia's national interests in the military sphere are to protect its independence, sovereignty, state and territorial integrity, to prevent military aggression against Russia and its allies, to ensure conditions for the peaceful, democratic development of the state.
Russia's national interests in the border sphere are to create political, legal, organizational and other conditions to ensure reliable protection of the state border of the Russian Federation, to comply with the procedure and rules established by the legislation of the Russian Federation for the implementation of economic and other activities in the border area of the Russian Federation.
Russia's national interests in the environmental sphere are to preserve and improve the environment.
The most important components of Russia's national interests are the protection of the individual, society and the state from terrorism, including intemational terrorism, as well as from natural and man-made emergencies and their consequences, and in wartime - from the dangers arising from the conduct of hostilities or as a result of these actions.

III. Threats to the national security of the Russian Federation The state of the domestic economy, the imperfection of the system of organization of state power and civil society, socio-political polarization of Russian society and criminalization of public relations, the growth of organized crime and the increase in terrorism, the aggravation of interethnic and the complication of intemational relations create a wide range of intemal

09/10/2023, 16:05 National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. De…he President of the Russian Federation of January 10, 2000. N 24)
 https://www.armscontrol.ru/start/rus/docs/sncon00.htm and extemal threats to the national security of the country.
In the economic sphere, threats are complex and are primarily due to a signiﬁcant reduction in gross domestic product, a decrease in investment, innovative activity and scientiﬁc and technical potential, stagnation of the agrarian sector, imbalance of the banking system, growth of extemal and domestic public debt, a tendency to predominate in the export of fuel and raw materials and energy components, and in imports - food and consumer goods, including basic necessities.
The weakening of the country's scientiﬁc, technical and technological potential, the reduction of research in strategically important areas of scientiﬁc and technological development, the outﬂow of specialists and intellectual property threaten Russia with the loss of advanced positions in the world, the degradation of knowledge-intensive industries, the strengthening of extemal technological dependence and the undermination of Russia's defense capability.
Negative processes in the economy are at the heart of the separatist aspirations of a number of constituent entities of the Russian Federation. This leads to increased political instability, weakening of the single economic space of Russia and its most important components - production, technological and transport links, ﬁnancial and banking, credit and tax systems.
Economic disintegration, social differentiation of society, devaluation of spiritual values contribute to the strengthening of tension in the relations between the regions and the center, posing a threat to the federal structure and socio-economic structure of the Russian Federation.
Ethnoegoism, ethnocentrism and chauvinism, manifested in the activities of a number of public associations, as well as uncontrolled migration contribute to the strengthening of nationalism, political and religious extremism, ethno-separatism and create conditions for the emergence of conﬂicts.
The common legal space of the country is blurred due to non-compliance with the principle of priority of the norms of the Constitution of the Russian Federation over other legal norms, federal legal norms over the norms of the constituent entities of the Russian Federation, insufﬁcient well-establishment of public administration at various levels.
The threat of criminalization of social relations, which are developing in the process of reforming the socio-political structure and economic activity, is becoming particularly acute.
Serious miscalculations made at the initial stage of reforms in economic, military, law enforcement and other areas of state activity, the weakening of the system of state regulation and control, the imperfection of the legal framework and the lack of a strong state policy in the social sphere, the decrease in the spiritual and moral potential of society are the main factors contributing to the growth of crime, especially its organized forms, as well as corruption.
The consequences of these miscalculations are manifested in the weakening of legal control over the situation in the country, in the meming of certain elements of executive and legislative power with criminal structures, their penetration into the management of banking business, large industries, trade organizations and commodity distribution networks. In this regard, the ﬁght against organized crime and corruption is not only legal, but also political.
The scale of terrorism and organized crime is increasing due to the often conﬂict-related change in forms of ownership, the aggravation of the struggle for power based on group and

09/10/2023, 16:05 National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. De…he President of the Russian Federation of January 10, 2000. N 24)
 https://www.armscontrol.ru/start/rus/docs/sncon00.htm ethno-nationalist interests. The lack of an effective system of social prevention of offenses, insufﬁcient legal and material and technical security of activities to prevent terrorism and organized crime, legal nihilism, the outﬂow of qualiﬁed personnel from law enforcement agencies increase the impact of this threat on the individual, society and the state.
The threat to Russia's national security in the social sphere is created by a deep stratiﬁcation of society into a narrow circle of rich and the predominant mass of low-income citizens, an increase in the proportion of the population living below the poverty line, and an increase in unemployment.
The threat to the physical health of the nation is the crisis of health systems and social protection of the population, the increase in the consumption of alcohol and narcotic substances.
The consequences of the deep social crisis are a sharp reduction in the birth rate and average life expectancy in the country, the deformation of the demographic and social composition of society, the undermining of the labor force as the basis for the development of production, the weakening of the fundamental unit of society - the family, the reduction of the spiritual, moral and creative potential of the population.
The deepening of the crisis in the domestic political, social and spiritual spheres can lead to the loss of democratic gains.
The main threats in the intemational sphere are caused by the following factors: the desire of individual states and interstate associations to belittle the role of existing mechanisms for ensuring intemational security, primarily the UN and the OSCE; the danger of weakening Russia's political, economic and military inﬂuence in the world; strengthening of military-political blocs and alliances, primarily the expansion of NATO to the east; the possibility of the appearance of foreign military bases and large military contingents in the immediate vicinity of the Russian borders; proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery; weakening of integration processes in the Commonwealth of Independent States; emergence and escalation of conﬂicts near the state border of the Russian Federation and the extemal borders of the member states of the Commonwealth of Independent States; claims to the territory of the Russian Federation.
Threats to the national security of the Russian Federation in the intemational sphere are manifested in the attempts of other states to counteract the strengthening of Russia as one of the centers of inﬂuence in the multipolar world, to prevent the realization of national interests and weaken its positions in Europe, the Middle East, Transcaucasia, Central Asia and the Asia-Paciﬁc region.

09/10/2023, 16:05 National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. De…he President of the Russian Federation of January 10, 2000. N 24)
 https://www.armscontrol.ru/start/rus/docs/sncon00.htm Terrorism poses a serious threat to the national security of the Russian Federation.
Intemational terrorism has launched an open campaign to destabilize the situation in Russia.
Threats to the national security of the Russian Federation in the information sphere are increasing. A serious danger is the desire of a number of countries to dominate the world information space, to oust Russia from the extemal and intemal information market; the development by a number of states of the concept of information wars, which provides for the creation of means of dangerous inﬂuence on the information spheres of other countries of the world; violation of the normal functioning of information and telecommunication systems, as well as the safety of information resources, obtaining unauthorized access to them.
The level and scale of threats in the military sphere are increasing.
The transition of NATO to the practice of forceful (military) actions outside the block's area of responsibility and without the sanction of the UN Security Council, elevated to the rank of strategic doctrine, is fraught with the threat of destabilization of the entire strategic situation in the world.
The increasing technological gap of a number of leading powers and the increase in their capabilities to create weapons and military equipment of a new generation create the prerequisites for a qualitatively new stage of the arms race, a radical change in the forms and methods of warfare.
The activities of foreign special services and organizations used by them on the territory of the Russian Federation are being intensiﬁed.
The protracted process of reforming the military organization and the defense industrial complex of the Russian Federation, insufﬁcient ﬁnancing of national defense and imperfection of the regulatory legal framework contribute to the strengthening of negative trends in the military sphere. At the present stage, this is manifested in the critically low level of operational and combat training of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, other troops, military formations and bodies, in the unacceptable reduction in the stafﬁng of troops (forces) with modem weapons, military and special equipment, in the extreme severity of social problems and leads to a weakening of the military security of the Russian Federation as a whole.
Threats to national security and interests of the Russian Federation in the border sphere are
due to: economic, demographic, cultural and religious expansion of neighboring states to Russian territory; intensiﬁcation of the activities of cross-border organized crime, as well as foreign terrorist organizations.
The threat of deterioration of the environmental situation in the country and depletion of its natural resources is directly dependent on the state of the economy and the readiness of society to realize the globality and importance of these problems. For Russia, this threat is especially great due to the predominant development of fuel and energy industries, the underdevelopment of the legislative framework for environmental activities, the absence or limited use of nature-saving technologies, and low environmental culture. There is a tendency to use the territory of Russia as a place of processing and burial of environmentally hazardous

09/10/2023, 16:05 National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. De…he President of the Russian Federation of January 10, 2000. N 24)
 https://www.armscontrol.ru/start/rus/docs/sncon00.htm materials and substances.
In these conditions, the weakening of state supervision, the insufﬁcient effectiveness of legal and economic mechanisms for the prevention and elimination of emergency situations increase the risk of man-made disasters in all areas of economic activity.

IV. Ensuring national security of the Russian Federation The main tasks in the ﬁeld of ensuring national security of the Russian Federation are: timely forecasting and identiﬁcation of extemal and intemal threats to the national security of the Russian Federation; implementation of prompt and long-term measures to prevent and neutralize intemal and extemal threats; ensuring the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Russian Federation, the security of its border area; the rise of the country's economy, an independent and socially oriented economic course; overcoming the scientiﬁc, technical and technological dependence of the Russian Federation on extemal sources; ensuring the personal safety of a person and citizen, his constitutional rights and freedoms on the territory of Russia; improvement of the system of state power of the Russian Federation, federal relations, local self-govemment and legislation of the Russian Federation, formation of harmonious interethnic relations, strengthening of law and order and preservation of socio-political stability of society; ensuring strict compliance with the legislation of the Russian Federation by all citizens, ofﬁcials, state bodies, political parties, public and religious organizations; ensuring equal and mutually beneﬁcial cooperation of Russia primarily with the leading countries of the world; raising and maintaining the military potential of the state at a sufﬁciently high level; strengthening the regime of non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery; taking effective measures to detect, prevent and suppress reconnaissance and subversive activities of foreign states directed against the Russian Federation; radical improvement of the environmental situation in the country.
Ensuring national security and protecting Russia's interests in the economic sphere are priority areas of state policy.

09/10/2023, 16:05 National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. De…he President of the Russian Federation of January 10, 2000. N 24)
 https://www.armscontrol.ru/start/rus/docs/sncon00.htm The most important tasks in foreign economic activity are: creation of favorable conditions for the intemational integration of the Russian economy; expansion of markets for Russian products; formation of a common economic space with the member states of the Commonwealth of Independent States.
In the context of liberalization of Russia's foreign trade and increased competition in the world market of goods and services, it is necessary to strengthen the protection of the interests of domestic producers.
It is crucial to pursue a balanced credit and ﬁnancial policy aimed at gradually reducing Russia's dependence on extemal credit loans and strengthening its position in intemational ﬁnancial and economic organizations.
It is necessary to strengthen the role of the state in regulating the activities of foreign banking, insurance and investment companies, to introduce certain and reasonable restrictions on the transfer to foreign companies of ﬁelds of strategic natural resources, telecommunications, transport and commodity distribution networks.
Effective measures should be taken in the ﬁeld of currency regulation and control in order to create conditions for the termination of settlements in foreign currency in the domestic market and to prevent the uncontrolled export of capital.
The main directions of ensuring the national security of the Russian Federation in the intemal
economic activities of the state are: legal support of reforms and creation of an effective mechanism for monitoring compliance with the legislation of the Russian Federation; strengthening state regulation in the economy; taking the necessary measures to overcome the consequences of the economic crisis, preserve and develop scientiﬁc, technical, technological and production potential, transition to economic growth while reducing the likelihood of man-made disasters, increasing the competitiveness of domestic industrial products, raising the welfare of the people.
The transition to a highly efﬁcient and socially oriented market economy should be carried out through the gradual formation of optimal mechanisms for the organization of production and distribution of goods and services in order to maximize the possible increase in the well-being of society and every citizen.
Tasks related to the elimination of deformations in the structure of the Russian economy, to ensure advanced growth in the production of high-tech products and products of a high degree of processing, to the support of industries that form the basis of expanded reproduction, with the provision of employment of the population are brought to the fore.

09/10/2023, 16:05 National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. De…he President of the Russian Federation of January 10, 2000. N 24)
 https://www.armscontrol.ru/start/rus/docs/sncon00.htm Of signiﬁcant importance are strengthening state support for investment and innovation activity, taking measures to create a sustainable banking system that meets the interests of the real economy, facilitating access of enterprises to long-term loans for ﬁnancing capital investments, providing real state support for targeted programs of industrial restructuring.
The most important tasks are the advanced development of competitive industries and industries, the expansion of the market for high-tech products. In order to solve them, measures should be taken to stimulate the transfer of new military technologies to civilian production, a mechanism for identifying and developing advanced technologies, the development of which will ensure the competitiveness of Russian enterprises in the world market.
The solution of these tasks involves the concentration of ﬁnancial and material resources on priority areas of science and technology development, support to leading scientiﬁc schools, accelerated formation of scientiﬁc and technical gap and national technological base, attraction of private capital, including through the creation of funds and the use of grants, implementation of development programs of territories with high scientiﬁc and technical potential, creation of infrastructure with the support of the state, ensuring the commercialization of research results of research developments with simultaneous protection of intellectual property within the country and abroad, development of a public network of scientiﬁc, technical and commercial information.
The state should promote the creation of equal conditions for the development and increase of the competitiveness of enterprises regardless of the form of ownership, including the formation and development of private entrepreneurship in all areas where it contributes to the growth of public welfare, the progress of science and education, the spiritual and moral development of society, and the protection of consumer rights.
Mechanisms for maintaining the life and economic development of particularly crisis regions and regions of the Far North, as well as a tariff policy ensuring the unity of the country's economic space should be developed as soon as possible.
The priority of economic factors in the social sphere is fundamentally important for strengthening the state, for real state provision of social guarantees, for the development of mechanisms of collective responsibility and democratic decision-making, social partnership.
At the same time, it is important to pursue a socially equitable and cost-effective income distribution policy.
The organization of the work of federal executive authorities, executive authorities of the constituent entities of the Russian Federation to implement speciﬁc measures aimed at preventing and overcoming threats to Russia's national interests in the ﬁeld of economy also requires further improvement of the legislation of the Russian Federation in this area and ensuring its strict compliance by all economic entities.
The rapprochement of the interests of the peoples inhabiting the country, the establishment of their comprehensive cooperation, the implementation of a responsible and balanced state national and regional policy will ensure domestic political stability in Russia. An integrated approach to solving these problems should form the basis of intemal state policy that ensures the development of the Russian Federation as a multinational democratic federal state.
Strengthening Russian statehood, improving federal relations and local self-govemment

09/10/2023, 16:05 National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. De…he President of the Russian Federation of January 10, 2000. N 24)
 https://www.armscontrol.ru/start/rus/docs/sncon00.htm should contribute to ensuring the national security of the Russian Federation. An integrated approach to solving legal, economic, social and ethno-political problems is needed with balanced respect for the interests of the Russian Federation and its constituent entities.
The implementation of the constitutional principle of democracy requires the coordinated functioning and interaction of all public authorities, a rigid vertical of the executive branch and the unity of the judicial system of Russia. This is ensured by the constitutional principle of separation of powers, the establishment of a clearer functional distribution of powers between state institutions, the strengthening of the federal structure of Russia by improving its relations with the constituent entities of the Russian Federation within the framework of their constitutional status.
The main directions of protection of the constitutional order in Russia are: ensuring the priority of federal legislation and improving the legislation of the constituent entities of the Russian Federation on this basis; development of organizational and legal mechanisms for the protection of state integrity, ensuring the unity of the legal space and national interests of Russia; development and implementation of regional policies that ensure an optimal balance of federal and regional interests; improvement of the mechanism preventing the creation of political parties and public associations pursuing separatist and unconstitutional goals and suppressing their activities.
Consolidation of efforts aimed at combating crime and corruption is required. Russia is extremely interested in eradicating the economic and socio-political basis of these socially dangerous phenomena, developing a comprehensive system of measures to effectively protect the individual, society and the state from criminal encroachments.
The formation of a system of measures for effective social prevention and education of law-abiding citizens is of priority importance. These measures should be aimed at protecting the rights and freedoms, morality, health and property of each person regardless of race, nationality, language, origin, property and ofﬁcial position, place of residence, attitude to religion, beliefs, membership in public associations, as well as other circumstances.
The most important tasks in the ﬁeld of combating crime are: identiﬁcation, elimination and prevention of the causes and conditions that give rise to crime; strengthening the role of the state as a guarantor of the security of the individual and society, creating the necessary legal framework for this and the mechanism for its application; strengthening the system of law enforcement agencies, primarily structures that counteract organized crime and terrorism, creating conditions for their effective operation; involvement of state bodies within their competence in activities to prevent illegal acts;

09/10/2023, 16:05 National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. De…he President of the Russian Federation of January 10, 2000. N 24)
 https://www.armscontrol.ru/start/rus/docs/sncon00.htm expansion of mutually beneﬁcial intemational cooperation in the law enforcement sphere, primarily with the member states of the Commonwealth of Independent States.
Decisions and measures taken by public authorities in the ﬁeld of combating crime should be open, speciﬁc and understandable to every citizen, be proactive, ensure the equality of all before the law and the inevitability of responsibility, and rely on the support of society.
To prevent and combat crime, it is primarily necessary to develop a legal framework as a basis for reliable protection of the rights and legitimate interests of citizens, as well as compliance with the intemational legal obligations of the Russian Federation in the ﬁeld of combating crime and respect for human rights. It is important to deprive crime of a breeding ground caused by shortcomings in legislation, the crisis in the economy and social sphere.
In order to prevent corruption and eliminate conditions for the legalization of capital acquired by illegal means, it is necessary to create an effective system of ﬁnancial control, improve measures of administrative, civil and criminal law inﬂuence, to develop a mechanism for checking the property status and sources of income of ofﬁcials and employees of organizations and institutions, regardless of the form of ownership, as well as the compliance of their expenses with these revenues.
The ﬁght against terrorism, drug trafﬁcking and smuggling should be carried out on the basis of a state-wide set of countermeasures to suppress these types of criminal activities.
Based on intemational agreements, it is necessary to cooperate effectively with foreign states, their law enforcement agencies and special services, as well as intemational organizations whose task is to combat terrorism. It is also necessary to make greater use of intemational experience in combating this phenomenon, to create a coordinated mechanism to counter intemational terrorism, to reliably block all possible channels of illicit trafﬁcking in weapons and explosives within the country, as well as their receipts from abroad.
Federal public authorities should prosecute persons involved in terrorist activities on the territory of the country, regardless of where terrorist acts causing damage to the Russian Federation were planned and carried out.
Ensuring the national security of the Russian Federation also includes the protection of cultural, spiritual and moral heritage, historical traditions and norms of public life, the preservation of the cultural heritage of all peoples of Russia, the formation of a state policy in the ﬁeld of spiritual and moral education of the population, the introduction of a ban on the use of airtime in electronic media for the rental of programs that promote violence, exploit low-lying manifestations, and also includes countering the negative inﬂuence of foreign religious organizations and missionaries.
Spiritual renewal of society is impossible without preserving the role of the Russian language as a factor of spiritual unity of the peoples of multinational Russia and the language of interstate communication of the peoples of the member states of the Commonwealth of Independent States.
In order to ensure the preservation and development of our cultural and spiritual heritage, it is necessary to create socio-economic conditions for creative activities and the functioning of cultural institutions.
In the ﬁeld of protection and promotion of citizens' health, it is necessary to strengthen the

09/10/2023, 16:05 National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. De…he President of the Russian Federation of January 10, 2000. N 24)
 https://www.armscontrol.ru/start/rus/docs/sncon00.htm attention of society, public authorities of the Russian Federation to the development of state (federal and municipal) insurance and private medical care, the implementation of state protectionism in the domestic medical and pharmaceutical industry, the implementation of federal programs in the ﬁeld of sanitation and epidemiology, child health protection, emergency medical care, disaster medicine.
The priority areas of the state's activities in the environmental sphere include: rational use of natural resources, education of the ecological culture of the population; prevention of environmental pollution by improving the safety of technologies related to the disposal and disposal of toxic industrial and household waste; preventing radioactive contamination of the environment, minimizing the consequences of previous radiation accidents and disasters; environmentally safe storage and disposal of decommissioned weapons, primarily nuclear submarines, ships and vessels with nuclear power plants, nuclear ammunition, liquid rocket fuel, fuel from nuclear power plants; safe storage and destruction of chemical weapons stockpiles for the environment and public health; creation and implementation of safe industries, search for ways of practical use of environmentally friendly energy sources, adoption of urgent environmental measures in environmentally hazardous regions of the Russian Federation.
A new approach to the organization and conduct of civil defense on the territory of the Russian Federation, qualitative improvement of the uniﬁed state system of prevention and liquidation of emergency situations, including its further integration with similar systems of foreign countries, is needed.
The foreign policy of the Russian Federation should be aimed at: conducting an active foreign policy course; strengthening key mechanisms for multilateral management of world political and economic processes, primarily under the auspices of the UN Security Council; ensuring favorable conditions for the economic and social development of the country, for maintaining global and regional stability; protection of the legitimate rights and interests of Russian citizens abroad, including the use of political, economic and other measures for this purpose; development of relations with the member states of the Commonwealth of Independent States in accordance with the principles of intemational law, development of integration processes within the framework of the Commonwealth of Independent States that meet the interests of Russia;
Russia's full participation in global and regional economic and political structures; assistance in conﬂict resolution, including peacekeeping activities under the auspices of

09/10/2023, 16:05 National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. De…he President of the Russian Federation of January 10, 2000. N 24)
 https://www.armscontrol.ru/start/rus/docs/sncon00.htm the UN and other intemational organizations; achieving progress in the ﬁeld of nuclear arms control, maintaining strategic stability in the world through the fulﬁllment by States of their intemational obligations in this ﬁeld; fulﬁllment of mutual obligations in the ﬁeld of reduction and elimination of weapons of mass destruction, conventional weapons, implementation of conﬁdence-building and stability measures, ensuring intemational control over the export of goods and technologies, as well as the provision of military and dual-use services; adaptation of existing arms control and disarmament agreements to the new conditions of intemational relations, as well as the development of new agreements, if necessary, primarily on conﬁdence-and security-building measures; promoting the establishment of zones free of weapons of mass destruction; development of intemational cooperation in the ﬁght against transnational crime and terrorism.
Ensuring the military security of the Russian Federation is the most important area of state activity. The main goal in this area is to ensure the possibility of adequate response to threats that may arise in the 21st century, with rational costs for national defense.
In preventing wars and armed conﬂicts, the Russian Federation gives preference to political, diplomatic, economic and other non-military means. However, the national interests of the Russian Federation require sufﬁcient military power for its defense. The Armed Forces of the Russian Federation play a major role in ensuring the military security of the Russian Federation.
The most important task of the Russian Federation is to implement deterrence in order to prevent aggression of any scale, including with the use of nuclear weapons, against Russia and its allies.
The Russian Federation must have nuclear forces capable of ensuring the inﬂiction of the damage given to any aggressor state or coalition of states in any situation.
The Armed Forces of the Russian Federation with peacetime combat personnel should be able to provide reliable protection of the country from air attack and solve, together with other troops, military formations and bodies, the tasks of repelling aggression in a local war (armed conﬂict), as well as strategic deployment to solve problems in a large-scale war. The Armed Forces of the Russian Federation should ensure the implementation of peacekeeping activities by the Russian Federation.
One of the most important strategic directions in the ﬁeld of military security of the Russian Federation is effective interaction and cooperation with the member states of the Commonwealth of Independent States.
The interests of ensuring the national security of the Russian Federation predetermine, under appropriate circumstances, the need for Russia's military presence in some strategically important regions of the world. Placement in them on a contractual and intemational legal basis, as well as on the principles of partnership of limited military contingents (military

09/10/2023, 16:05 National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. De…he President of the Russian Federation of January 10, 2000. N 24)
 https://www.armscontrol.ru/start/rus/docs/sncon00.htm bases, Navy forces) should ensure Russia's readiness to fulﬁll its obligations, promote the formation of a sustainable military-strategic balance of forces in the regions and enable the Russian Federation to respond to the crisis situation in its initial stage, contribute to the implementation of the foreign policy goals of the state.
The Russian Federation is considering the possibility of using military force to ensure its national security, based on the following principles: the use of all forces and means at its disposal, including nuclear weapons, if necessary, to repel armed aggression, if all other measures to resolve the crisis situation have been exhausted or proved ineffective; the use of military force within the country is allowed in strict accordance with the Constitution of the Russian Federation and federal laws in cases of threat to the life of citizens, the territorial integrity of the country, as well as the threat of violent change of the constitutional order.
The defense industrial complex plays an important role in ensuring Russia's national interests.
Restructuring and conversion of the defense industrial complex should be carried out without prejudice to the development of new technologies and scientiﬁc and technical capabilities, modemization of weapons, military and special equipment and strengthening the positions of Russian manufacturers in the world arms market.
It is necessary to create all the necessary conditions for the organization of priority fundamental, predictive and exploratory scientiﬁc research, ensuring the creation of a promising and advanced scientiﬁc and technical foundation in the interests of the defense and security of the state.
The main tasks of the Russian Federation in the border sphere are: creation of the necessary regulatory legal framework; development of interstate cooperation in this area; counteraction to economic, demographic, cultural and religious expansion into the territory of Russia by other states; suppression of transnational organized crime, as well as illegal migration; implementation of collective measures to ensure the security of the border space of the member states of the Commonwealth of Independent States.
The most important tasks of ensuring information security of the Russian Federation are: implementation of constitutional rights and freedoms of citizens of the Russian Federation in the ﬁeld of information activities; improvement and protection of domestic information infrastructure, integration of Russia into the world information space; countering the threat of unleashing a confrontation in the information sphere.

09/10/2023, 16:05 National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. De…he President of the Russian Federation of January 10, 2000. N 24)
 https://www.armscontrol.ru/start/rus/docs/sncon00.htm Of particular importance for ensuring the national security of the Russian Federation is the effective use and comprehensive development of intelligence and counterintelligence capabilities in order to timely detect threats and determine their sources.
The system of ensuring the national security of the Russian Federation is created and developed in accordance with the Constitution of the Russian Federation, federal laws, decrees and orders of the President of the Russian Federation, resolutions and orders of the Govemment of the Russian Federation, federal programs in this area.
The basis of the system of ensuring the national security of the Russian Federation is the bodies, forces and means of ensuring national security, implementing measures of a political, legal, organizational, economic, military and other nature aimed at ensuring the security of the individual, society and the state.
The powers of the bodies and forces to ensure national security of the Russian Federation, their composition, principles and procedure for action are determined by the relevant legislative acts of the Russian Federation.
The following take part in the formation and implementation of the national security policy of
the Russian Federation:
The President of the Russian Federation - directs, within the limits of his constitutional powers, the bodies and forces to ensure the national security of the Russian Federation; authorizes actions to ensure national security; in accordance with the legislation of the Russian Federation, forms, reorganizes and abolishes the bodies and forces of national security subordinate to him; delivers messages, appeals and directives on national security problems, in his annual messages to the Federal Assembly clariﬁes certain provisions of the Concept of National Security of the Russian Federation, determines the directions of the current domestic and foreign policy of the country;
The Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation - on the basis of the Constitution of the Russian Federation, on the proposal of the President of the Russian Federation and the Govemment of the Russian Federation, forms the legislative framework in the ﬁeld of ensuring national security of the Russian Federation;
The Govemment of the Russian Federation - within its powers and taking into account the priorities formulated in the annual messages of the President of the Russian Federation to the Federal Assembly in the ﬁeld of ensuring national security of the Russian Federation coordinates the activities of federal executive bodies, as well as executive bodies of the constituent entities of the Russian Federation, forms, in accordance with the established procedure, items of the federal budget for the implementation of speciﬁc targeted programs in this area;
The Security Council of the Russian Federation - carries out work on the proactive identiﬁcation and assessment of threats to the national security of the Russian Federation, promptly prepares draft decisions for the President of the Russian Federation to prevent them, develops proposals in the ﬁeld of ensuring the national security of the Russian Federation, as well as proposals for clarifying certain provisions of the National Security Concept of the Russian Federation, coordinates the activities of national security forces and bodies, monitors the implementation of decisions in this area by federal executive bodies and executive bodies of the constituent entities of the

09/10/2023, 16:05 National Security Concept of the Russian Federation (approved. De…he President of the Russian Federation of January 10, 2000. N 24)
 https://www.armscontrol.ru/start/rus/docs/sncon00.htm Russian Federation; federal executive bodies - ensure the implementation of the legislation of the Russian Federation, decisions of the President of the Russian Federation and the Govemment of the Russian Federation in the ﬁeld of national security of the Russian Federation; within their competence, develop regulatory legal acts in this area and submit them to the President of the Russian Federation and the Govemment of the Russian Federation; executive authorities of the constituent entities of the Russian Federation - interact with federal executive bodies on the implementation of the legislation of the Russian Federation, decisions of the President of the Russian Federation and the Govemment of the Russian Federation in the ﬁeld of national security of the Russian Federation, as well as federal programs, plans and directives issued by the Supreme Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, in the ﬁeld of military security of the Russian Federation; together with local self-govemment bodies, they carry out measures to involve citizens, public associations and organizations in assisting in solving national security problems in accordance with the legislation of the Russian Federation; submit proposals to the federal executive authorities to improve the national security system of the Russian Federation. *** The Russian Federation intends to resolutely and ﬁrmly ensure its national security. The created legal democratic institutions, the established structure of the state authorities of the Russian Federation, the wide participation of political parties and public associations in the implementation of the National Security Concept of the Russian Federation is the key to the dynamic development of Russia in the XXI century.
