

Take into account the hypotheses of possible intemational developments, expose the objectives of our defense policy and the strategy that France chooses, present the framework in which the action of the armed forces now fits, as well as the resources policy that the nation intends to devote to its defense: such is the ambition of this book.
The primary objective is to ensure the independence of the country and the defense of the vital interests of the nation. The choice made by France, and which is reaffirmed here, to have a nuclear deterrent force, credible and constantly adapted to evolving threats, guarantees us these. The nuclear deterrent strategy has fueled frequent debates, today as in the past. Its validity and effectiveness in the new strategic situation seem to me to be amply demonstrated.
1994. Twenty-two years separate us from the first White Paper on national defense , which Mr. Michel Debr published, while Georges Pompidou was President of the Republic. This first work collected and clarified the principles of the defense policy that General de Gaulle had defined. For our defense and for our armed forces, it marked the passage from the painful period of decolonization to the modem era. Many of these pages retain all their strength and value today. The events that have occurred since the fall of the Berlin Wall, the disappearance of the Warsaw Pact, the accelerated changes in our European and intemational environment, technological progress and economic life, have encouraged me, with the agreement of the President of the Republic, to make the publication of a new White Paper a govemment priority.
At the same time, our traditional forces are given a new task and dimension.
The defense of France is no longer immediately played out at its borders. It depends on maintaining intemational stability and preventing crises, in Europe or outside Europe, which, if they degenerate, would endanger our interests and our security. We must therefore develop the specific ability of our traditional means to predict, prevent and act, often at a distance from the national territory.
To this end, it is necessary to have capabilities that allow us to join forces with our allies at any time, and to actively prepare for a future European capability.


Our defense policy must in fact contribute, with the entry into force of the Treaty on European Union, to gradually building a common European defense.
Finally, the Govemment emphasizes that defense has a global character, which is not reduced to its military dimension, which is certainly essential. Civil defense and economic defense must receive greater attention. Civilian forms of national service will help to anchor the legitimacy of conscription in our society.
More generally, we must always ensure the close link between our defense and our conception of the nation. Common values unite French citizens. Defense is only real and solid if it is based on a just political concept, and considered as such by the entire nation.
Edouard Balladur The political identity of the European Union must ultimately be expressed and affirmed in the field of defense. This choice, which aims to consolidate a center of integration and stability in Westem Europe, constitutes a major strategic and political objective.
Its effects will be slow. Until then, we cannot rely on others for our protection. To achieve this, we must make the necessary efforts, thanks to which France plays a major role in this European project.


The temptation is still strong, despite the painful experiences following the collapse of the Berlin Wall and the Warsaw Pact; to now pay less attention to our defense. To let your guard down. However, the history of our country teaches us, like ancient Latin wisdom, that it is peace which is a dividend of defense, not the other way around. Instability of borders, alliances, invasions, resistance, reconquests: the history of France and military history often merge. They mark our territory, our collective memory, our culture. It is in mind that we have made this White Paper with these Prime Ministers, a priority of the Govemment.
To explain to the French the meaning of the effort to be maintained, define a framework for the apparatus and assign objectives to the armed forces.
At the center of my concems, there is first of all Europe: a source of both questions and hope. The euphoria which accompanied the reunification of Germany and the freedom rediscovered in a European space restored to its true historical and cultural dimensions, has given way to doubt. The awakening of the people is accompanied, unfortunately, by impulses that we had thought forgotten and by the retum of wars in Europe. Sometimes close to our territory, questions of borders or national minorities degenerate into open conflicts, or threaten to do so. This instability weighs on our security and constitutes a challenge for the political project symbolized by the Treaty on European Union.
My conviction is that France must be exemplary. Not France alone in a concert of powers as we knew it in the century. But France in Europe. The European project only if it actively contributes to it, by assuming a leading role and the sacrifices that it implies. Not by playing one State against another, but by succeeding, for the first time in the tormented Old Continent, a pooling of the in the service of the defense of Europe and a security common to the States engaged in its This ambition is at the heart of the new White Paper and the Govemment's choices.
Its consequences are, in the long term, considerable,


Nuclear deterrence remains one of its foundations. France must expect that its choices in this area will always be contested by others at the intemational level, perhaps increasingly with the end of the Soviet threat. It cannot retum to it, because its independence is at stake today, and perhaps that of Europe tomorrow.
Finally, I would like to emphasize the extent to which this White Paper is faithful to the republican concept of defense. It is aimed, first and foremost, at the citizens of this country. It is also intended for these men and women, civilians and soldiers, who defend our country on a daily basis. It is, in fact, only the defense of a people. From the soldier to the nation's elected officials, there is no credible defense policy without the support of the men who make it In the post-Cold War context, it is up to democracies to put force together in the service of peace and thus protect themselves against the fragility that is natural to them.
The defense of our values, our ideals, in new circumstances, in places far from the national territory, will often constitute the first line of our security. There can be no question, however, of initiating a risky policy that would not gamer the national consent essential to the defense of the country.
Leotard The defense strategy presented in this White Paper includes numerous factors of renewal, which I hope will be the basis of a new consensus: adaptation capacities of deterrence, new role of conventional forces, employment scenarios of forces, permanent security posture, new operational priorities, armament policy, concept of force constitution and change of format - all examples which attest to the richness of the work which prepared the Govemment's choices, with the help of the Commission chaired by the Vice-President of the Council More than ever, defense policy also serves our responsibilities in the world. The presence of France overseas, the influence in Africa, our direct and indirect interests in many regions, prohibit us from limiting our strategy to a purely continental dimension. I therefore hoped that the orientations of this White Paper would clearly take into account the requirements resulting from this global dimension. It is not a question of setting objectives beyond the reach of a power like France, but of describing the specific nature of the missions which result from them for the armed forces.
We Mr. Marceau Long. who serve it, who shape it into becoming.


A new sleep between the powers
2. Europe and the risks of crises
3. Proliferation 4.
New vulnerabilities 5. The inadequacies of the intemational order
SUMMARY intemational, evolving risks and threats defense proliferation 1. Defend France's interests 2. Build Europe and contribute to intemational stability 3. Implement a global concept of defense Introduction : Why a White Paper now?
3 The intemational reference framework of our
FIRST PART: THE STRATEGIC CONTEXT defense
2 The objectives of the
1. Towards a new security architecture in Europe 2.
Strengthening the role of the United Nations 3. Bilateral cooperation and defense agreements 4. Arms control, disarmament and anti-terrorism agreements


2
4 Defense strategy
6 Human resources
5 Capabilities of the armed forces.
8 The defense effort
7 Arms policy and The level of defense effort 2.
Planning and programming
PART TWO: STRATEGIES AND CAPABILITIES industrial
PART THREE: RESOURCES
1. A renewed strategy 2. Force employment hypotheses 3. Missions of the armed forces
1. New priority capabilities 2. Permanent security posture 3. Projectable forces 4.
General environment 5. Overall format of the armed forces
1. The choice of a mixed army 2.
Conscripts: highlighting military service 3. Reservists: the project of renewal 4. Career or sub-contract military personnel 5. Civilian Defense personnel and the arms industry
1. Defense and industrial and technological choices 2. The European dimension 3. Renewed relations between 4. An export policy


Conclusion
PART FOUR: DEFENSE AND SOCIETY
1. Army and nation 2.
Civilian forms of national service 3. Civil defense 4. Economic defense 5. The organization of intelligence 6. Defense and public opinion
9 Defense and society


Why a White Paper on Defense now? To meet at least three needs. Better understand our times and the role that the country's defense plays in it. Place defense policy in the long-term perspective that is essential to it.
In this period of transition, it is both vital and difficult to distinguish the determining factors for the defense of France, in Europe, to define its main objectives and the means to achieve them. . Then, shed light on defense policy over the long term, because it needs objectives, clarity, but also time. This is true for men, whose training and then professional life span decades. This is true of equipment, whose production cycle and use extend over a long period. The weapons which will enter service in 2005-2010, often later, must be designed now, based on the analysis of operational needs, technological and industrial capacities, and financial resources. this is true in part of the framework and organization of defense: in particular of the forces. They must be able to adapt to changing risks and needs. They cannot be perpetually under construction. . First, discem the essential in the accelerated changes in our environment which accompany the end of the twentieth century. The demise of the Soviet Union put an end to the confrontation between a seemingly monolithic alliance and a collection of countries united by ideals of democracy and freedom.
This long-term dimension characterizes the It also ushered in a period of uncertainty and instability. Nations, once again less constrained after the freeze of the long post-war period, are rediscovering a margin of action and relationships, sometimes a history, that they thought were forgotten.
Introduction to be taken into account in defense policy. It leads to retaining, for the objectives described in this White Paper, a 15 to
20 year perspective.
Unlike a centuries-old experience, France finds itself in the unfamiliar situation, where its borders no longer seem immediately and directly threatened. Rarely, however, since the war, has an often diffuse feeling of insecurity been felt so strongly. The precise and identified threat is no longer embodied in an adversary, a space, nor a Pact. Our security is no less exposed, either because risks appear, or because we sense new ones, or because we fear the reappearance of dangers that we may have believed, for a moment, to be distant.
Explain the defense and encourage the support of the French.


Furthermore, even when it had reached maturity, the defense instrument in the 1960s and essentially described in the 1972 White Paper still had shortcomings: weaknesses in intelligence, inadequacies in projection means, discrepancies in relation to the evolution of command systems, deficiencies in terms of interoperability with our allies. Certain capabilities which now appear essential were not to the same degree ten or twenty years ago. On the basis of old certainties, often confirmed and lasting, are grafted new questions, new needs, which cannot be ignored in a reflection on defense over the next fifteen years.
Largely organized for forty years around a guard mission facing the east, equipped, trained to respond to hypotheses whose origins were, essentially, in the Cold War, our defense apparatus must proceed, everyone feels it, for a true conversion. The circumstances, the threats, the risks are different. Fixing the defense system in outdated designs and capabilities, refusing or delaying a necessary change, would represent an unacceptable risk. . To be effective and credible, defense policy must also generate and nurture national support and participation. Defense is a collective and permanent action. It is the responsibility of the govemment: it is up to it to present to citizens the data on defense problems, so that the greatest number of French people subscribe to it. At the origin of the White Paper, there is an essential questioning about the defense of France and its context. The desire to shed light on the future, to provide the first answers. After a historic upheaval where the temptation was great to let down our guard, to receive the peace dividend, it is necessary to expose to the public the elements of the debate, to show that it is indeed peace which is a dividend of the defense.
The defense of 1994 is no longer that of 1972, nor of 1983. Format of the armies, In ten years, out of 700,000 defense personnel, 105,000 jobs have been lost.
The strength of the Army has increased from 330,000 men in 1983 to 240,000 today, the number of its divisions from 15 to 9 in five years. The Navy had 175 buildings in 1981, 113 units in 1993. The number of aircraft For all those who aim to explain or teach the contemporary world, its difficulties and its challenges, this clarification also aims to serve as a contribution to reflection. budget, structures: the adaptation has already started.
Moreover, from the end of the 1980s, the beginnings of developments in Eastem Europe, the increasing frequency of crises and conflicts, the experiences acquired in extemal operations, all contributed to the fact that the armed forces engage lucidly in a movement of questioning.


This long-term perspective was already that of the White Paper of 1972. It is important not to hide the difficulty of the exercise today. It was then possible to present the synthesis of principles and decisions matured and applied over several years, in a relatively stable environment. This new statement of our defense policy comes at the start of a new phase in intemational, European and national life.
The ambition of this White Paper extends to the 20s 10s. This is certainly a difficult objective for strategic analysis. But it appeared essential to free ourselves from the effects of inertia which inevitably affect the defense effort due to the length of past investments, human and especially material. And it is a necessity to shed light on the years to come, which will be punctuated by several programming laws: the result will be a renewed army model, a reconstructed defense apparatus.
The combat force of the Air Force is reduced from 450 to less than 400. Having more and more concentrated units is a necessity, including from an operational point of view: the movement is well underway.
The same goes for remodeling structures. To cite only a few examples, the creation of Joint Forces (EMIA), the Armed Forces 2000 plan, the establishment of the European Corps, the OPTIMAR plan of the Navy, the tightening of the Air Force system, the rise in power of the Directorate of Military Intelligence, the opening of the Joint Defense College, testify to so many efforts to adapt defense to a new situation.


For the first time in its history, France no longer experiences a direct military threat near its borders. On the other hand, new risks may affect its security and defense. It continues and will continue to be confronted with threats to its economy, its industry, its culture, but these are power relations of another order. No one disputes that the main direct, concrete, measurable global threat that weighed on its vital interests has faded today and probably for a long time. The assessment of risks and the nature of the responses to them has once again become an uncertain exercise. After a period of exceptional rationality, dominated by the East-West relationship, and more recently nuclear cooperation and dialogue, the world is entering a new strategic era.
After the disappearance of bipolar antagonism, the evolution of the world seems to hesitate between increasing integration and progressive destructuring. The pattems of relations between East and West or North and South, inherited from the post-war period, have lost their meaning. On the other hand, the opposition between wealth and poverty not only retains its relevance, but threatens to take an increasingly acute tum, as the differences between levels of development increase. Fault lines cross every continent. In this context, purely military defense logics will hold a relatively less place than in the recent past. THE
Chapter 1: Intemational outlook, evolving risks and threats
PART 1 More than any other factor, upheavals in the intemational context are likely to affect our defense policy and strategy. It is therefore important to discem its characteristic features, even if we can often only guess at the main contours of future risks and power relationships.
1 A NEW DEAL BETWEEN THE POWERS
THE STRATEGIC CONTEXT


Without prejudice to the progressive affirmation of new regional powers, all prospective analyzes confirm that the growth of the world economy will be organized around three major groups: North America, Westem Europe and an Asian area, encompassing Japan, whose components are in full evolution. North America today represents 28% of the world's gross domestic product, Westem Europe in the broad sense 32%. Developed Asia's high growth rate could see it reach a quarter of world industrial production by the year 2000, with the Asia-Pacific region's share of world income rising from 24% in 1989 to 35% in 2010 . .
The evolution of the United States of America, after the disappearance of the Soviet Union, raises questions. Even if the reduction in the relative weight of American power seems likely to continue, due to the dynamism of its competitors, the Americans are vigorously striving to strengthen the intemal foundations of their security. economic dimensions play a preponderant role: but they cannot even ignore, on the contrary, security concems.
These poles do not maintain power relations that risk degenerating into armed conflicts and they condemn the use of war as a means of resolving disputes.
However, they develop competitive relationships, in an economic and financial system whose common foundations they admit. , and which sometimes leads them to alliances of opportunity in certain strategic sectors. The Summit of the seven most industrialized countries is the translation of this approach.
The logics which govem their economy and their security are still far from being harmonized, and will only be so when the respective situations of the great powers and the three groups are less heterogeneous.
The only military giant, the United States controls its security in all areas .
Between the dream of leadership of a new world order and the temptation to withdraw into oneself, there seems to be room for the definition of a great power policy, selecting its strategic interests, and consequently the areas in which they are located, as well as the means of their defense in the event of a threat.
These fundamental movements lead to a different distribution of balances between powers. New connections are being sought between economic groups and security structures; they will have an influence on military and defense systems.
Growth poles and security


China is helping to increase Asia's economic weight in the world.
She was able to apply economic reforms and thinks she can double her product By their importance and their ripple effect in such a context, American strategic and technological choices are attracting attention. For several years, the United States has been promoting the control of spaces and flows. This interest is reflected in their pre-eminence in naval, aeronautics, then IT, space and electronics.
The ability to control speed, particularly in IT, and intangible spaces (communication, energy, but also media networks) has become essential. The considerable development of national technical intelligence resources and their orientation towards new risks give the United States a form of leadership among industrialized countries. These choices outline a strategy which does not systematically avoid violent confrontations and combat management, but which favors the selection of engagements, the economy in human lives and a more flexible management of conflicts which must be justified to an opinion and increasingly informed political leaders. These analyzes show the weight which will remain, in the period considered, that of the United States.
The heterogeneity of the Asian whole is much more considerable and the reflection on its security structures is not very advanced. But, in these groups, the economic powers should continue to assert themselves, including in matters of defense. appears, in the short term, to be struggling with the management of its reunification and the liquidation of the heavy legacy of the communist period.
It has, consequently, reduced its defense effort, particularly in investments, and is endeavoring to resolve the problems left by the military and industrial apparatus of the former GDR. There is, however, little doubt that in the medium term, it will seek to preserve its industrial base in the field of armaments and will develop forces and equipment corresponding to its newfound great power responsibilities.
Japan has already equipped itself with a new military tool. It carries out technological, industrial and space policies which can make it a great military power in a relatively short period of time. He will naturally be attentive to developments in China, particularly in this area as well as the consequences of a possible failure in the fight against nuclear proliferation in his region, particularly in North Korea.
In Europe, security choices are still weighed down by numerous uncertainties, although to different degrees. The European Union gave itself, by the treaty of February 7, 1992, the long-term perspective of a common defense, which will make it a vector of stability and integration for the whole of Europe.
Both Germany and Japan are now increasingly being called upon to play their part in maintaining intemational security. Both countries wish to achieve permanent membership status on the Security Council.


Finally, the North-South distinction appears all the more artificial since, in the military field itself, the use of advanced technologies, the sale of relatively sophisticated conventional equipment, including by the industries of the countries of the former Pact of Warsaw, risk further increasing the level of armament of regional powers.
Sub-Saharan Africa is the only region which should experience, between 1990 and 2000, an increase in its population located below the poverty line (to reach almost 50% of the total population). There are therefore few points in common between these regions or the countries of North Africa, and the Asian region whose economic growth rate is often twice that of European countries.
The disappearance of the socialist bloc and the growing divergences in the process of economic development sound the death knell for the notion of Third World in the etymological sense. There is not one South but Souths where the States obey very different, often opposing, logics. Some seek to structure new regional groups (ASEAN) or zones (Turkey and Central Asia). Others develop a purely high-ranking national ambition (India). gross domestic growth by the year 2000. But it constitutes an uncertainty for the future.
Neither East-West nor North-South Without experiencing the same extremes, the differences between the countries of the North are also considerable since the revelation of the dilapidated world hidden by the Iron Curtain. New areas of poor development are thus exposed, in direct contact with the most industrialized countries, and their restoration weighs on the future.
In Europe, the hope of a balanced development of the continent is rebom, under the progressive impetus, from West to East, of the integration movement of which the European Union will be the main vector. The new democracies also vigorously refuse to be stigmatized by their former membership of the Warsaw Pact.
Still others will be tempted to export their difficulties.
The lack of progress on the political level will inevitably weigh on its growth. The terms of Hong Kong's integration in 1997 will be a test of the regime's rigidities. His power politics raise questions. The export of destabilizing nuclear and ballistic equipment, the assertion of aero-maritime ambitions in the China Sea, territorial issues such as that of the Spratly Islands, are seen as so many risks for regional balances.


other General evolution and security
2 EUROPE AND THE RISKS OF CRISES Before examining the transformation of the risks which directly weigh on our security, this must be placed in the general context of demographic and economic developments.
Nowhere else is the beneficial effect of the disappearance of the global Soviet threat felt more than in Europe: progress of democracies, retreat of Such a situation is fraught with dangers and destabilization; it exacerbates regional antagonisms; it leads to disorderly movements, particularly population displacements. These are already considerable, with the United Nations recording a total of 35 million displaced people. Since the mid-1980s, Westem Europe has welcomed 800,000 to 1 million immigrants each year. The integration of these populations and their protection against foreign schemes that would seek to exploit these movements represent a benefit for the host countries.
The world population is expected to increase by more than 2 billion people by 2015, reaching a total of billions. On this date the population of developed countries will only represent 13% of the world population (16% today). The population growth rate is decreasing slightly but remains very high. The population of sub-Saharan Africa is expected to double again in the next twenty-five years.
A positive development should lead to an increase in global integration favored by growth. Conversely, there is a risk of destructuring and an increasingly strong division of the world between rich countries, buffer zones and poverty-stricken areas. The priority action of States and the intemational community therefore consists, on the one hand of guaranteeing growth and the distribution of its fruits, an imperative of solidarity, on the other hand, an imperative of security, to prevent as best as possible any fatal rupture in this development, which could lead to crises or armed conflicts. For France and the countries of Westem Europe, this first involves controlling the dangers of crises on the European continent.
The economies of developing countries will have the greatest difficulty coping with these demographic changes. Forecasts raise fears of worsening inequalities in income growth. They emphasize that 20% of the richest countries have 82% of world income and 20% of the poorest share 1%.


But Central and Eastem Europe is in the grip of dangerous instability. Serious uncertainties weigh on the development of Russia. The independent states resulting from the former Soviet Union are engaged for a long time in the search for a new intemal and extemal balance. Issues of minorities and borders have reappeared in force on the European scene and threaten, if they are not dealt with sufficiently in advance, to degenerate into open conflicts. Europe is rediscovering war situations on its territory, while the questions raised by the distribution and future of the ex-Soviet nuclear arsenal are a source of tension and require time to be resolved.
The fate of nuclear weapons stationed on its soil is already a security issue for the country.
The situation of the states bordering Russia is closely dependent on its development.
The Baltic states are striving for the complete withdrawal of Russian forces, knowing that they cannot ensure their security alone. The Caucasus is plunged into instability and war, in a region traditionally considered strategic by Russian policy and which borders the southem flank of the Atlantic Alliance. The Nordic states are monitoring the redeployments of the Russian army withdrawn from Central Europe, sometimes near their borders.
Russia seems to have entered a long period of uncertainty. Intemally, even in the event of the stabilization of democratic power, the march towards a market economy will come up against obstacles and crises outside the borders, the presence of large Russian minorities, as well as the prolonged stationing of military assets can become a source of tension with its neighbors. the bulk of Russian military assets on their territory, reduction of arms accumulations in Central Europe. The reconstitution of a direct conventional threat against the territory of Westem European countries would require a relatively long time and the expression of a will which is fortunately absent today.
However, the most new element in terms of regional balances is the independence of Ukraine. A new regional power, due to its dimensions, its geographical location and its military and economic potential, it may be required to play a major role in the stability and security of Europe.
In the long term, Russia will remain a strong military power in Europe, firstly because of the imposing potential inherited from the Union and then because of the historical and geopolitical strengths of this great country. The defense apparatus, today hypertrophied and partly in a crisis situation, remains an essential attribute of its status and the guarantor of its interests. The existence of a significant nuclear and conventional capacity in the east of the continent, whatever its purpose or the intentions of those responsible in terms of foreign policy, must therefore be considered as a constant over the period envisaged in this White Paper. .


It is feared that the central and eastem transition towards a new geopolitical balance will be accompanied by armed conflicts for several years. The revival of nationalism is already causing the retum of war in the Balkans and the Caucasus.
The question of national minorities and the contestation of borders inherited from two world wars now constitute the most immediate threats, against a backdrop of serious economic and social recession.
The potential for crises and the reappearance of wars in Europe constitute a priority concem for our defense policy. This must also take into account new threats.
The current or virtual crises in Europe present characteristics for which Westem states and their collective defense institutions are hardly prepared. They do not seem, at least initially, to call into question vital national interests. They therefore attract varying attention and involvement from States depending on the conception of their strategic interests, history or geography. In many cases, conflicts should retain a classic character, without the risk of escalating to nuclear extremes. When this risk exists, it may happen, unlike in the previous period, that it initially only directly involves regional interests: this could be the case, for example, if one of the three powers, excluding Russia , holding Soviet nuclear weapons on their soil, was involved. But could the risk of chaining then be controlled?
The Yugoslav crisis could be interpreted as an encouraging signal for supporters of the national, ethnic or religious homogeneity of States. The problems of the Hungarian, Albanian or Russian minorities can be revived. The disappearance of several federal groups, Yugoslavia, Czechoslovakia, USSR, seems to usher in an era of fragmentation of States, which could lead to attempts at territorial redistribution, the dangers of which Europe knows. continent. It is now up to it to define its place in a broader security framework .
Finally, recent conflicts are marked less by the scale of the movements of forces than by the dispersion and complexity of the lines of contact, urban warfare and prolonged guerrilla warfare.
In this context, the availability of a large quantity of conventional weapons on the intemational market is an additional factor fueling and aggravating crises.


With regard to weapons, nuclear weapons must be classified separately, due to their specific and unstoppable destructive effects, disproportionate to other categories ( The proliferation of so-called weapons of mass destruction is not a new phenomenon. But several factors aggravating this phenomenon and the threats it raises fears have appeared in recent armies and make it one of the major challenges for intemational security and our defense. It is important to analyze these risks precisely , without giving in to excessive dramatization, and to measure their evolution.
Nuclear proliferation can be carried out in very varied ways depending on the complexity of the weapons. Rudimentary fission weapons, with an energy of a few kilotons to a few tens of kilotons, can be produced without nuclear testing, as long as a certain technological level, nuclear materials and the political will to succeed are combined. The considerable development of open knowledge now allows manufacturing without testing, which was unthinkable thirty years ago.
It is necessary, from the point of view of threat analysis, to distinguish between the weapons themselves and the vectors likely to carry them, as well as to characterize the nature of the risk that they are likely to pose to our interests. or our strengths.
A minimum of nuclear tests and a high technological level are, however, necessary to build advanced fission weapons (which can reach or exceed 100 kt).
Several large non-nuclear industrial countries would be able to achieve this capacity quickly if they changed their policies.
3 PROLIFERATION The very general expression of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction actually covers quite different, but often complementary, processes. Proliferation itself has a double dimension: on the one hand the export or dissemination, generally considered illicit, by a country or a company, of equipment, technologies, materials or know-how, linked to the manufacture of nuclear, biological, bacteriological, chemical weapons, or missiles, particularly ballistic weapons; on the other hand, the effort led by a State to research, develop and produce these same weapons, most often undertaken clandestinely.
The various forms of proliferation Thermonuclear weapons, of low mass and small bulk, can develop considerably higher energies (in a ratio of 1 to 100 times superior to conventional weapons). has The notion of weapons of mass destruction is itself tainted with imprecision.


without testing they would limit themselves to spreading materials Evolution represent a terrifying but ambiguous threat, because they do not allow precise effects to be predicted either in time or space, and present risks of backlash for their user. These characteristics are poorly suited to military actions. However, around ten seem to have undertaken such programs, particularly in the Middle and Near East, as well as in Asia. would avoid the creation of explosive nuclear weapons. The handling of dangerous materials necessary for their development would pose acute safety problems. These are more weapons of terror than weapons of destruction.
Arms with fission weapons). They require a very high technological and scientific level and tests for their development.
Chemical proliferation is in principle the easiest and least expensive.
With regard to vectors, the ballistic missile is a particularly feared threat, not in itself, but because it provides weapons of mass destruction with maximum military, strategic and psychological effects. The manufacture of independent ballistic means requires specialists and significant industrial resources in very varied disciplines. But exports made by a small number of countries, excluding Westem nations and states from the former Soviet Union, have encouraged very broad proliferation. Thirteen located mainly in the Middle East and Asia, possess or are developing missiles with a range greater than 300 km, several of which have ranges equal to or greater than
1000 km.
Unlike radioactive material dispersal weapons, they can be and The number of powers seeking to acquire a nuclear capability has decreased compared to estimates made around twenty years ago, due to the official renunciation policies displayed by South Africa, Argentina and Brazil. . More than 160 States signed the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty which entered into force in 1970. More than 150 signed the Convention on the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons of January 15, 1993.
Chemical weapons, anti-personnel weapons using toxic chemical agents, adapt to very diverse vectors. Its production techniques are largely: part of the pesticide industry, in fact, can be oriented towards military uses. The storage and manufacture of weapons, however, poses difficult problems.


Signature by the greatest number The dissemination of knowledge in these sensitive areas has experienced unprecedented growth. Scientific and technological exchanges have multiplied. Open literature, accessible databases and available calculation programs reduce the scope of protected knowledge. In addition, this diffusion is favored by the dual nature, civil and military, of some of the technologies concemed.
However, several sensitive and directly interested countries have not adhered to these Treaties. Above all, new risks and factors for the progression of various forms of proliferation have emerged in recent years.
The challenges of control The revelation of the scale of Iraqi programs, the attitude of North Korea towards the rules of the NPT, have highlighted the possible effectiveness of clandestine policies in several areas, especially nuclear, chemical and ballistic, from when they were undertaken with resolution and with appropriate financial and technical means .
It is to be feared that preventive control policies alone will not be enough to protect us against the risk of proliferation; their reinforcement nevertheless constitutes a primordial issue for our security.
The management of the Soviet heritage constitutes an important concem in these same areas. The enormous stockpile of nuclear weapons, estimated by Russian officials themselves at 40,000 warheads of all powers, will only be reduced slowly. The question of controlling the dissemination of materials, know-how and high-tech equipment remains raised, especially since intemational attention has focused more on intercontinental strategic weapons than on tactical weapons . compliance with and extension of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty is of strategic importance. The calling into question of its rules, the disintegration of the verification regime would in fact lead to Proliferation is favored by the production of materials. However, the production of fissile materials usable in nuclear weapons, as well as that of certain components of chemical weapons, has reached considerable levels. Indeed, nuclear power plants normally produce plutonium from their fuel and a certain number of products used in the chemical industry, particularly for agricultural purposes, provide basic elements for chemical weapons. Stocks are not always controlled. The situation will worsen when the dismantling of part of the weapons of the former Soviet Union provides, in addition to plutonium , highly enriched uranium.


Certain forms of aggression such as terrorism or, in many of its consequences, drug trafficking, take on dimensions such that they can threaten the security or integrity of the country, the life of its population or thwart respect for its intemational commitments. They therefore fall within the scope of the defense within the meaning of article 1 of the order of January 7, 1959.
The application of the Chemical Convention, which also provides for a strict regime, will constitute a test of the credibility of such instruments. The dual nature of the activities concemed makes this regime both restrictive and very difficult to implement.
The analysis of the risks that we may face in the new strategic context would be incomplete without mentioning the non-military threats that weigh on our security.
These, exploiting national vulnerabilities, are often facilitated or stimulated by the globalization of trade and flows, which are increasingly important to take into account when defining defense strategy. upheavals in the global strategic equation, likely to require a re-examination of our security and defense policy.
Terrorist action is undoubtedly the main non-military threat capable of affecting our security. Hiding its initiators, masking the intentions, it proceeds from an often indirect strategy, in the service of political objectives. These consist of destabilizing the attacked by putting its security organization in difficulty, taking advantage of the considerable impact of the media on public opinion. Terrorism also allows non-state actors to highlight their role and Overall, there is an increased risk that a small number will continue and intensify their efforts to have, at the tum of the century, the means they consider indispensable to achieve their power objectives. The appearance of new arsenals including weapons of mass destruction at the start of the next century therefore appears plausible and our defense must take this perspective into account. . Terrorism The Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR), created in 1987 in Rome, has not been approved by some powers exporting ballistic technologies. Its strengthening and extension are therefore necessary but made difficult, because the distinction between conventional weapons and weapons of mass destruction has only limited meaning in the particular field of vectors.
4 NEW VULNERABILITIES


France is particularly exposed to this risk. Like any modem democracy, it offers facilities for terrorist strategy which takes advantage of the great freedom of movement, the quality of communications, and respect for human rights and freedoms. But his responsibilities and his intemational status expose him more than others. The extent of its diplomatic and consular network is a valuable instrument of action, but also a target. Its role within the framework of the United Nations or in application of defense agreements may involve it in extemal operations which give rise to foreign threats. Terrorism can also appear as an instrument for circumventing or neutralizing our military means.
Extremism can feed on the nationalist revival observed with the end of the Cold War, particularly in Europe. France's action in favor of maintaining peace, its commitment to preventing or resolving crises are therefore also a source of risks.
Extremism, whether religious or nationalist, is a key source of terrorism. prove their power. Terrorist movements, which have very diverse motives, origins and locations, are much less watertight than their clandestine nature might suggest.
Industrial and technological developments in new and worrying fields.
Threats thus weigh on our computer systems (intrusion> as on our energy production installations or all communication networks. The use of radioactive means, resulting from the diversion of sensitive materials or nuclear waste can be facilitated by proliferation. The risks of nuclear terrorism call for a strengthening of general protection and reaction measures of the apparatus which are difficult to develop and apply in a democratic society. The same is true of biological or chemical terrorism, including incrimination is now provided for by the penal code.
Religious and nationalist extremism Islamist extremism undoubtedly represents the most worrying threat. It feeds on economic and social crises as well as demographic pressure in the countries where it develops. It often takes the place that communism may have occupied as a mode of opposition to the Westem world. Growing inequalities in growth and income distribution, our geographic proximity, the distribution of our interests around the world must encourage us to consider it as a threat.


Information flows are at the heart of this globalization of exchanges. The collection, circulation and dissemination of information take place on a global scale within a media system which operates according to its own logic, in real time and increasingly through live images.
Drug trafficking constitutes a threat to public health, to the sovereignty of States and to intemational security, to the extent that it is often a factor in prolonging conflicts and fueling guerrillas or terrorist movements.
This development introduces new constraints into the decision-making processes, the modalities of action and the pace of crisis management. The place of The globalization of flows, favored by economic actors, but also by the movements of people, capital and intangible goods, calls into question, in fact, both the separation between the national and intemational spheres and the relevance of the distinction between public and private actors. The control of States over these phenomena is becoming more and more difficult, because they are no longer the only ones, nor even the main actors, in these new strategies. Their economic security, however, requires that they take them into account.
Drug trafficking This justifies this non-specifically military threat being apprehended The logic of territorial unity which has until now driven the action of States is gradually weakening in favor of transnational logics of networks, animated and driven by the globalization of trade. This also exerts its influence on the conditions of our security and on our strategy.
The laundering of capital that accompanies trafficking involves several hundred billion dollars per year; intemational cooperation is being put in place to reduce its importance.
Finally, the expansion of poppy and coca growing areas beyond any state control is cause for concem.
Globalization of security and communication strategies They are indeed taking on an unprecedented scale, because the complexity of the networks and the powerful means of mafia groups make their dismantling very difficult. within the framework of defense policy.


But the media prioritize events, areas of tension and conflict, serious and painful facts, according to their own criteria and values which sometimes differ from those of the political world and the analysis, by States, of their strategic interests. .
A serious clash in a country can thus be passed over in silence in favor of a difficult humanitarian situation.
The upheavals that have occurred since 1990 are producing their effects at a faster pace than the largely unfinished adaptation of intemational institutions. Neither For those States which have the full range of intemational media, press agencies, continuous news agencies, satellite television, it allows unprecedented collection and circulation of information and promotes the dissemination of the messages we want . to pass.
The media effect can create a restrictive environment, encouraging intervention and the use of military means under the influence of strong and general emotion, in haste. The development of continuous information networks introduces real time into decision-making, imposing on decision-makers not only the media channel but also their own pace. The possibilities of manipulation and disinformation are the downsides of generalized information and great vigilance must be exercised in this area. information has beneficial effects for transparency in decision-making and application.
It is an essential factor in the fight for human rights, to prevent conflicts and defuse tensions.
These new rules of the game enter into strategic thinking and require particular attention in the conduct of operations. The media are no longer just spectators but actors in crises and conflicts, which influence their conduct and their outcome.
Consequently, planning will have to take into account, increasingly earlier, their presence in theaters of operation. Media management is becoming one of the elements of military strategy. Information is now at the heart of all defense policy.
The development and possession of intemational media tools thus appear to be both a factor of power and a source of weakness.
5 THE FAILURES OF THE INTERNATIONAL ORDER


The main data of developments The need for intemational regulatory instruments is stronger than ever; it translates, in an unprecedented manner, into demands for intervention by the intemational community in the intemal affairs of States. The United Nations is constantly called upon but does not always have the means to assume all of its responsibilities. In particular, it is threatened with a serious financial crisis because it does not have the resources due to it.
The United Nations, nor the multilateral institutions bom during the Cold War, still have the means to meet all the new challenges posed to them . The result is a feeling of disorder and helplessness.
Faced with such fluctuations, France must make choices consistent with its interests as a power, a European power, a nuclear power, and a permanent member of the Security Council. It will thus contribute to the construction of a more stable and secure security system , adapted to the new strategic situation. defense, and illustrating the transitional phase we have entered: can be summarized as follows:
The trend towards the destructuring of the classic intemational system is accentuated by the questioning of some of its fundamental frameworks. The principle of state sovereignty is put into perspective by practices of supervision, mandates, or intemational intervention. The principle of the intangibility of borders is weakened in several regions of the world, particularly in Europe where the question of nationalities is re-emerging. directly interesting After the dissolution of the Warsaw Pact, security institutions in Europe are still changing. They define new missions, bringing together a growing number within them or around them, which can weaken the effectiveness of decision-making processes. The future of the most integrated multilateral organizations, therefore a priori the most stable, military (NATO) or political and economic (European Union), is linked to the answers that will be provided to the difficult questions posed by their enlargement .


Generally speaking, the main security risk now lies in regional conflicts that could jeopardize the search for intemational stability and more just and balanced growth in the world.
4) Defense policy must take into account the globalization of trade and the definition of its instruments integrate the role of the media in crisis management.
1) The overall Soviet threat has disappeared. But, in Europe, Russia will remain a strong military power, which must be taken as such in our strategic assessment. In addition, local or regional crises, which can degenerate into classic wars, risk affecting the continent's transition to a new balance.
2) The level of military equipment of many regional powers should rise not only in the field of conventional armaments, but also, due to proliferation practices, in that of weapons of mass destruction, including nuclear weapons, at the beginning of the next century.
3) Non-strictly military threats will weigh on national security and must be taken into account in defense policy, particularly those resulting from terrorism and activities 5) The intemational regulatory system is not immune to profound challenges .
The disappearance of bipolar antagonism should make it possible to fully establish the role of universal or regional political institutions. France must propose choices in this area which will influence its defense policy.
6) The United States will remain an essential center of intemational security in the next twenty years. Westem Europe, which now has a political base, should assert its defense identity and the Asian powers, around Japan and China, will see their role in global balances grow and will have to determine their strategic choices accordingly .




CHAPTER 2: The objectives of defense policy The changes in the intemational context and the strategic perspectives accompanying the end of the Cold War call for an adaptation of France's defense policy, as well as that of its European partners in the European Union and the Atlantic Alliance. The defense apparatus, largely organized around a guard mission facing the East, must carry out a real conversion. These transformations affect military strategy. But the definition of France's defense policy is first a function of an analysis of its national interests and the determination of the essential objectives for its survival and its security policy.
The security of the European continent, and therefore that of France, depends largely on the capacity of Westem European countries to constitute a center of stability and integration. European construction: including in terms of defense, is therefore a priority. Furthermore, it is above all important, after the end of the Cold War, to prevent the reappearance of major threats against our vital interests and serious destabilization of the intemational order by participating in the establishment of a stable and peaceful intemational system. is therefore essential. This dual goal represents the second objective of defense policy.
It appears that the major goals are changing little. France must be able to ensure its protection and the defense of its interests in the world. It has the ambitions of a power present in many parts of the globe outside of Europe, a legacy of its history and its geography, also a consequence of its economic development.
The first objective of defense policy is the defense of its interests. If these remain relatively stable, intemational developments and our status as a middle power influence the ability to defend them.
The diversification of risks of all kinds also characterizes this century. The result is an increase in the vulnerabilities of our societies, which can jeopardize national cohesion. Thus, intemal security and safety The interdependence of our interests with those of our main partners continues to grow. Our relative weight in the concert of States encourages us to seek the best alliances and the best instruments for multiplying our power. This is why France's action is increasingly part of a multilateral cooperation framework, European Union, Atlantic Alliance, CSCE, UN, in particular.


necessary. the ultimate defense of our vital interests against any threat either
DEFENDING FRANCES INTERESTS France cannot rely on others to defend its vital interests. The questions raised by the prospect of the construction of a common European defense within the framework of the European Union must not, however, be The survival of the Nation is attached to vital interests . Therefore, the first of our defense policy remains to be able to ensure. alone if at'en The conception of interests thus becomes global, associating traditional interests, resulting from a geographical and heritage approach, with immaterial interests, no less real. Not all of them concem the means of our defense policy, particularly military, in the same way. The difficulty, but it is imperative, is to determine and prioritize those whom France intends to defend or promote by force. extemal are increasingly closely linked. This observation calls for a global concept of defense, which constitutes the third objective of our defense policy.
But it is important to avoid giving too precise a definition and to preserve the authorities' freedom of assessment and action if they were to be threatened.
This vision of France's interests is evolving. Firstly because, in a growing number of cases, in particular that of economic development or energy supplies, the interests of France and its Westem neighbors or partners are hardly dissociable. Then, because to material interests are now added, even more than yesterday, immaterial interests, linked for example to the defense of the major principles of intemational life and to our status as a permanent member of the Security Council .
The integrity of the national territory, including the mainland and the overseas departments and territories, of its aerial and maritime approaches, the free exercise of our sovereignty and the protection of the population constitute its heart today.
The traditional definition of our interests is most often of a patrimonial nature, linked to our attachment to goods: territory, economic wealth, means of communication, the presence of nationals whom we intend to protect wherever they are and to whom we must be able to access without hindrance. These interests have hardly changed over the past twenty years. The division of the world into two antagonistic blocks, however, modifies our perception of some of them. France's action in Africa, for example, corresponds more to an appreciation of its intemational responsibilities in an area where it can exercise its influence than to strategic concems.


on the one hand, in maintaining peace on the European continent and in the areas bordering it to the East and South, the strategic importance of the Mediterranean Basin and the Middle East being particular Preserving the independence of the country, assuming these intemational responsibilities, promoting democracy and the law are finally goals linked to the defense of its The boundary between France's vital interests and strategic interests does not have to be specified in advance. Both must be defended with the same determination. The delimitation of this border is the responsibility of the political authorities of the country, whose freedom of appreciation must remain complete. However, our strategic interests lie,
essentially:
Attached to the values of democracy, France has all the more ambition to promote them and, when necessary, to defend them, as in its eyes they constitute a guarantee of stability and intemational security. Defense policy contributes to this action.
Ensuring these strategic interests should make it possible to prevent threats against be lost from sight. It cannot be excluded, in the long term, that as the interests of European nations become closer, France's conception of its vital interests will come to coincide with that of its neighbors.
Its intemational responsibilities result from its obligations as a permanent member of the Security Council, from its history, from its particular vocation. A permanent member of the Security Council, it must actively contribute, undoubtedly more than others, to maintaining peace in the world and respect for intemational law. on the other hand, in areas essential to the country's economic activity and freedom of trade and communications, security of supplies, particularly along maritime routes, must be ensured. Our oil dependence, common to the countries of, is constant on the Middle East, which benefits from the lowest technical production costs and above all from 65% of world reserves. In the gas sector, our dependence is growing on Algeria and Russia. Finally, for France, 82% of imports and 56% of extra-community exports take a sea route, a large part of which passes through the Mediterranean, the Red Sea and the northem part of the Indian Ocean. For political or economic reasons, these are, in all cases, strategic zones.
Beyond these interests which directly respond to a logic of security, France has interests which correspond to its intemational responsibilities and its rank in the world. our vital interests.


Our defense policy will therefore favor, on the one hand, development France is one of the few countries that can have an action on the still increasing and the result of a proactive policy of and
INTERNATIONAL the French-speaking world as well as intangible elements, linked to the strength of ideas and a conditions. Insertion everywhere else. On his success or failure in this enterprise depends in her This European choice is necessary for both strategic and economic reasons. to influence European construction and future developments particular factors of power, economic but also military and diplomatic, But, without a defense intemational responsibilities and our rank in the world. Certainly, other modes defense policy in the new perspective of future defense, France will most often act within the framework of its alliances and a businesses. Finally, this progressive construction leads to the affirmation of an identity The primary objective of France's defense policy is therefore to defend stability in the world. However, it does not escape reorganization of order progressive development of a clean European capacity in terms of defense, on the other hand our A strong integration pole is certainly our economy as a whole is both a fact which certain vocation to the universal. It must be remembered that the history of France and that of its Europe's choice Europe. Let her be strong on the continent and she will be able to talk about a farm
2 BUILDING EUROPE AND CONTRIBUTING TO THE recent history of the continent leads to the search for instruments for its stability of France's rank in the world will be largely linked of action also come to support these , their sustainability cannot be rank in the world. This results, as for each country, from a combination
THE participation in the creation of a security space extending across the entire continent. There the vital and strategic of the country as well as those corresponding to our planetary around large regional groups. European nation, it registers its policy which would be if it was not also expressed in the field of or even scientific and cultural. It takes into account the influence exerted through definitively its role in the concert of nations. defense are largely confused. affirmed by the Treaty on European Union.


3 IMPLEMENT AN OVERALL CONCEPTION OF DEFENSE.
The security of France requires above all preventing the rebirth on the continent of a major threat against our vital interests. In this regard, our defense policy is defined first and foremost by its capacity to contribute to stability and peace in Europe.
Changes in the intemational system affecting defense are not limited to military and strategic aspects alone. They concem the life of the nation as a whole.
The entire social field, the daily existence of populations and economic activity can be affected by this changing and uncertain context: this end of the century is marked by an increased vulnerability of democratic societies. interests of Europeans. The weight of its commitment must concretize its will and its choice which, for our defense policy as in other areas, is that of the future.
The construction and maintenance of a stable and peaceful intemational order is also necessary on a global level. As a result, France will work to prevent direct and indirect threats that would endanger this intemational order. As long as it can establish, through respect for the values on which it is founded, the stability of the balances which guarantee and of its institutions, the security of France will be ensured under the best conditions.
Orientation. of the order of January 7 relating to the general organization of the defense is therefore confirmed. Article I states that defense aims to ensure at all times, in all circumstances and against all forms the security and integrity of the territory as well as the life of the population. It also provides for respect for alliances, treaties and intemational agreements.
Relying on coordinated civil and military resources, this approach is the only response adapted to the Defense policy, coordinated with our diplomatic action, must focus, in the new intemational context, on the prevention of conflicts and These developments call, today even more than yesterday, for a global concept of defense. Far from constituting an isolated domain, it must embrace all of the country's activities and be part of the permanence of national life.
A global concept of defense combines military defense with a civil and economic dimension, but also a social or Prevention and intemational order


.
Civil defense primarily ensures the protection of populations, the maintenance of public order and the preservation of the continuity of govemment action. first object of ensuring this cohesion The protection of populations requires preventing and covering major natural and technological risks, whatever the circumstances. This mission obviously ignores the gradation between peace, crises and war. Recent years have shown the number and variety of possible situations (flood, oil spill, waste distribution, forest fire , etc.).
Citizens increasingly expect them to take permanent preventive measures and have the necessary emergency means.
Maintaining or restoring public order is a sovereign mission. Local authorities, and in particular mayors as agents, are, on the ground, the first to be involved. Here too the social demand for security of goods and people is increasing. In a broad sense, maintaining public order also implies ensuring the continuity of public service. Without it, there is neither public action nor economic life.
France has the chance to bring together men and women around a desire to live together. It must ensure that it defends what is both a heritage and a shared project.
National cohesion, today very exposed to the multiple shocks caused by social, economic and intemational developments, is an essential condition for defense.
Civil defense diversity of threats weighing on our societies. The aspects of this non-military defense are as diverse as they are essential.
Power comes less from the extent of the national territory than from the social organization, the education of people, their solidarity and the values that bind them. In this sense, defense is inseparable from the idea of nation. It therefore concems both the French model of integration and social organization, the common values of the Republic, their universal vocation and the influence of the language. .
National cohesion Each of these missions remains today; their importance is even reinforced by current and future threats.
The global defense policy has and contributes to it.


Economic defense They condition both economic success and the effectiveness of the defense system.
Controlling transfers of sensitive technologies is an important security factor and therefore contributes to economic defense.
Economic defense within the meaning of the 1959 order aims to ensure, in normal times, the reduction of the country's vulnerabilities and, in times of crisis, the proper distribution of resources. Above all, it is about ensuring the security of resources and the permanence of their production. These essential objectives are now being extended to include the protection of new bases of economic activity and the control of technology transfers.
The defense of France calls primarily, of course, on its military resources. Its civil and economic dimension must not be neglected, and gives it a global character. It also participates in a certain culture which contributes to its national dimension. Taking this non-military aspect into account in the years to come constitutes an objective of our defense policy.
Maintaining continuity of govemment action begins with protecting sensitive installations and networks, many of which are essential to the lives of populations and national defense. Their multiplication and their sensitivity make them prime targets for terrorist actions. In the event of an exceptional situation, defense must finally make it possible, in order to maintain this continuity of govemment action, to oppose the actions undertaken by an aggressor on national territory.
Certain sectors of activity such as energy, telecommunications, transport and sensitive tertiary sectors, such as financial and IT services, play a fundamental role in the economy. The interruption of the functioning of one of these sectors can lead to an almost total paralysis of the economy and a disruption of the social balance. Economic defense must, therefore , guarantee economic agents the maintenance of these vital sectors.
Overall, civil defense is a major concem of the French. It is of interest to most sectors which must take it into account.
Technologies have become, for their part, major power issues.


1 TOWARDS A NEW ARCHITECTURE OF
IN EUROPE At the same time, we must clarify the role we want to see played by the United Nations at a time when it is increasingly called upon by crises of all kinds throughout the world. cultural requires the establishment of a new security system to replace the era of war We must define the place that belongs, in our policy, to bilateral agreements
Chapter 3: The intemational reference framework for our defense policy The restoration of Europe in its political, historical and The political and institutional framework in which our action in defense and security takes place is undergoing profound transformation. The nature of relations between Westem European states has changed under the influence of several decades of European construction. Their political project has thus become an essential component of our security and the Treaty on European Union has given it a new dimension. remains the main defense organization, but the American commitment, if it is reaffirmed with constancy, will take more flexible and less massive forms than during the confrontation with the Warsaw Pact. The European continent is looking for a broad and safe organization for its security.
In a context marked by numerous uncertainties, France must carry a global political project that allows Finally, we must take into account the evolution of political and legal instruments for disarmament and the fight against proliferation. defense, in particular for the benefit of the stability of the African continent.


On the basis of a national effort which remains the condition of freedom of choice , France has
three main goals: to ensure the necessary Achieving the ambitious objectives thus set by the Treaty can only be gradual. It will have to rely on the strengthening of cooperation between States in matters of defense and on the development of the potential, still limited, of to go beyond the achievements of recent decades, for the benefit of the stability of the continent as a whole.
In the meantime, it designates the Westem European Union, an integral part of the development of the European Union to develop and implement the decisions and actions of the Union which have implications in the field of defense. renovate the transatlantic link, continuing to adapt to the future strategic context and its new missions, permanence of the American commitment to the security and stability of Europe.
The Treaty on European Union establishes a common foreign and security policy and provides for the formation of a true European defense identity, then of a common defense and security policy, which could lead when the time comes to common defense. assert a European ambition in terms of defense the Treaty of the European Union defines the framework this choice leads to ruling out two extreme options: the one which would rely solely on opportunistic coalitions; one which would aim to build, within a federal-type European framework, an integrated military organization.
European ambition avoid the reconstitution of antagonistic military blocs, by establishing a security framework including Russia and taking into account the process of progressive enlargement of the European Union.


bilateral The Union of With Great Britain, the level of our cooperation must be increased. Our two countries share the status of nuclear power which already gives rise to joint reflection. On many points, they also have a similar strategic approach, and they have relatively significant extemal action capabilities and the will to use them. the contribution they will make to the realization of the political project through the Treaty of the European Union, in which central.
In the military and armaments field, noticeably These cooperations with variable geometry will find their true dimension in large defined is called to play a role as a defense component of the European Union. She must set herself a goal In particular, it will develop the privileged relationship it already has with Germany, concretized by the establishment in 1988 of a Franco-German Defense and Security Council. Cooperation between the two countries will remain a driving force in the European project and the prospect of an extension of Germany's intemational responsibilities, which France supports, opens up a new field of action.
Specific relationships must also be developed with our other partners. These are, in particular, Italy and Spain, particularly with regard to security in the Mediterranean and space cooperation. In the field of armaments, the potential of Italy and Sweden must encourage the realization of In the military field, the relations established with the programs Belgium and Spain on the occasion of the constitution of the European Corps and peacekeeping operations must serve as an example in cooperation with other states, notably the Netherlands. or multilateral, are at the origin of concrete rapprochements between national defense systems and promote a broader European dynamic. In this spirit, France will systematically seek any opportunity for cooperation with the countries involved with it in European construction.
Occidental is now clearly recognized The construction of defense Europe requires the desire of these three States to harmonize the conception of their security interests, by deepening their cooperation, and if necessary, by pooling military resources.


WEU's planning capacity will also need to be strengthened. It plays an essential role in giving the European organization real military credibility. Crisis and emergency planning must be developed, to complement that of the Atlantic organization, for the specific needs of Europeans, whether they decide on autonomous action, or on combined action by the WEU and of To this end, it is necessary for Europeans to have military capabilities The acquisition of a minimum of autonomy in these sectors, on the basis of own or joint capabilities, is a determining element for the construction of European defense. France is prepared to make the necessary efforts for this. It must convince its partners to get involved. The gradual convergence of European interests suggests that this political objective is not out of reach.
This policy is inseparable from the particular effort that must be made by Europeans in the key areas for crisis management, which are intelligence, command and communication systems and transport. to make possible autonomous military action by Europeans, outside of cases of aggression involving the main guarantee of the North Atlantic Treaty.
The establishment of the European Corps represents a first step, which calls for others, either as the experience expands or as other multinational units are formed. The development of such initiatives adapted, moreover, to the needs of several European countries due. of the reduced size of their army, constitutes a priority. The idea of an aero-maritime force, proposed by Spain, France and Italy to their WEU partners, goes in the same direction, as does that of a European military air transport component.
The establishment of the European defense identity through the WEU will finally be facilitated by the use of existing means of defense. It is indeed important to avoid duplication for which the States do not have the means. This principle already applies to certain allied forces which have received or will in the near future receive a dual assignment to and from the WEU. But the WEU must in the future be able to appeal clean. The European Corps is the first illustration of this. Bom from a German initiative, it will bring together, in 1995, 45,000 men provided by Germany, Belgium, Spain and France, under the authority of a multinational staff. It will then represent one of the main components of the forces deployed in Westem Europe.


only to the forces of the European allies but also to collective assets of the Alliance, such as elements of staff, headquarters, communications, intelligence, airbome detection systems The military commitment of the United States on the European continent is at the origin of the Atlantic Alliance and represents the heart of the transatlantic link. For forty years, it constituted a central guarantee for the defense of Westem Europe. It is considered not only by the Allies, but also by the new democracies of Central Europe, as a fundamental element of security in Europe. role of A renovated Atlantic Alliance France will continue to promote a strengthening of obvious priority. On the other hand, they could hold back more in the treatment of questions relating to security and stability on the continent, but which do not directly affect their strategic interests.
At The development of these activities and the distribution of tasks between the two organizations must be carried out while avoiding both the dependence of one on the other and unnecessary competition.
Today, while maintaining its commitment, the United States is drawing the consequences of the disappearance of the Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact. They are therefore reducing the level of their presence and gradually defining a selective approach to security problems in Europe, based on a more rigorous assessment of their national interests. Dialogue with Russia, the control and reduction of nuclear weapons inherited from the Soviet Union, as well as the prevention of crises which could concem either Russia or the powers which hold such nuclear weapons on their territory will continue to benefit complementary to the European Corps already illustrates the possibility of a gradual increase in European defense capabilities within the framework of benefit of the Atlantic Alliance as a whole, as shown by the agreement signed on January 21, 1993 between the German and French leaders and the Supreme Allied Commander in Europe Cooperation between the two organizations is expected to develop even more than in cases where the guarantee clauses of Article 5 of the. North Atlantic Treaty, new instruments and specific procedures will have to be implemented by the Allies. This is one of the main challenges of the renovation of


The developments that have occurred since 1991 in the organization and activities of the Alliance must be extended and amplified. Crisis management and peacekeeping require a permanent adaptation of military systems to the political objectives of each operation or mission. The integrated military organization was not prepared for this. The reflection on the place of Europe as such within the Alliance must still be translated into reality, both in terms of political consultation structures and in the military and operational domain. Relations with the democracies of central and eastem Europe call for developments in a new framework.
The Atlantic Alliance must become a place where to the relationship between Europeans and The summits of London in 1990, Rome in 1991 and especially Brussels in 1994 also the identity and of France is participating in this renovation. A member of the Atlantic Alliance since the beginning, it intends to remain faithful to its allies and to its commitments within the framework of the principles which govemed the creation of the Alliance. Its highest authorities have never failed to recall the wish of our country, always linked to the United States, that American commitment in Europe be maintained. takes on new missions. It now extends its competence, without having a monopoly, to peacekeeping operations, to which it can lend the powerful means that it is undoubtedly the only one able to bring together and coordinate today . It strives to promote new cooperation in the military field with the States of the former Warsaw Pact. It seeks to take into account new types of risks to the security of Allies such as proliferation .
European defense and security. The declaration of the sixteen Heads of Govemment, at the Summit of January 11, 1994, makes this clear, by explicitly referring to the terms of the Treaty on European Union. The progress of European American identity represents the new dynamism, expected and essential to meet the requirements of peace and security on the continent. They involve consultation In the ongoing evolution of the Atlantic Alliance, France's policy will be consistent with its
constant principles: first prepared and then defined the principles for better adaptation of the Alliance.


members. This dialogue therefore goes beyond traditional defense themes The adaptation of the structures of eager to establish concrete relationships with and willing to ensure the must be resolutely pursued. It calls for reinforced coordination between Allies can be specific to be implemented for missions other than those arising from These different developments are not likely to change our situation of their crisis management, an increased and permanent role of consultation and particularly the States of Central and Eastem Europe, must be organized and actions of The military organization must respond to new forces of countries not belonging to an integrated military structure, such as France and privileged to in 199 and to develop military cooperation with those of the States which are the most encouraged. This orientation implies, as we will see more, to specify the to new strategic conditions political developments. In particular, it is appropriate to provide the means for organizing common against attacks and cannot ignore the new risks facing political and military structures of the Allies and, due to the specific characteristics of
Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty, and for which recourse would be had to Finally, increased openness towards other European countries, in particular military within the principles laid down in 1966 (no Spain, or even not belonging to the Alliance, such as the new intergovemmental cooperation in the field of security and defense increased policy of Europeans within the Alliance, as well as responsibilities in the organization. strengthening the European pillar of the Alliance, should be this change. role and political purpose of the North Atlantic Cooperation Council established of Westem Europe, means of flexibility and environments of commitment and the necessary means, as well as the requirements of North Americans, for major issues directly affecting the security of States democracies of Central Europe or the Nordic countries.
The Alliance must constitute the essential place for consultation between Europeans and obligations they imply. multilateral decisions bringing together the sixteen member countries. modularity, to be able to adapt to the diversity of possible situations,


A The establishment of an expanded security framework for the European continent and adapted to the new situation therefore seems essential. From this perspective, France will guide its action based on a certain number of principles: not France, as it has done since 1991, to participate actively in the definition of the main orientations conceming the renovation of including with regard to the adaptation of the military organization to the new missions. It is therefore logical to ensure France's participation in meetings of decision-making bodies since the commitment of French forces and our interests are at stake. The presence of the Minister of Defense at the Atlantic Council, in addition to that of the Minister of Foreign Affairs, that of the Chief of the Armed Forces on the Military Committee, are now decided on a case-by-case basis by the President of the Republic and Prime Minister. This position is consistent with our constant desire to strengthen, within the Alliance, the weight of multilateral forums where each State expresses itself in full capacity. participation in the integrated military organization, free disposal of our forces and our territory, independence of our nuclear force, freedom of assessment of the conditions of our security in times of crisis, freedom of choice of our means in the event of action) will continue to be guide our relations with the integrated military organization. expanded security including Russia The European security area restored to its fullness by the disappearance of the East-West confrontation poses, beyond the necessary adaptation of West European and Atlantic institutions, formidable challenges. The states of central and eastem Europe, faced with multiple risks of crisis, are seeking framework guarantees. Russia is facing both the retum of its armies to the national territory, an immense political upheaval, economic and social, and geopolitical uncertainties on its markets: the ancestral complex of encirclement resurfaces, counterbalanced by a marked desire to join the community of European countries. European construction, for its part, is not limited, over the next fifteen years, to the current borders of the European Union. Several formerly neutral states are on the path to European integration in the relatively short term (Austria, Finland, Sweden); certain countries in central and eastem Europe are also aiming to eventually enter the European Union and therefore in the Westem European Union.
This constancy


The multilateral instruments which will be used to define this new security framework are known, although it is not yet possible at this stage to outline it precisely. The Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) is the place par excellence for political dialogue between equals, at State, from all European countries. Everyone's need for security is recognized as legitimate and the principles of cooperation and transparency are established. The French initiative, taken up by the European Union, of a Stability Pact intended to prevent regional disputes, makes it the guardian of the arrangements that could result from it.
The foundations of security in Europe cannot rest on the division of the continent into antagonistic camps. Everything must therefore be done to avoid the resurgence of a partition of Europe and a logic of blocs, which would only have been out of place compared to the period of the Cold War. The creation or extension of alliances would not be enough to provide a solution to the problems, particularly of borders and minorities, which have resurfaced with virulence and constitute potential sources of serious crises.
Such a development will be all the better assured if the legitimacy of European construction will be recognized by all the players on the continent, including Russia. This implies, in particular, that it does not pose a political or strategic obstacle to the extension of the European Union. The goal of European integration is indeed an essential component of long-term peace and stability in Europe.
The recent efforts of the Atlantic Alliance to develop cooperation in areas relevant to defense with the countries formerly members of the Warsaw Pact and the sovereign states resulting from the breakup of the Soviet Union can give a concrete tum to the opening necessary on a continental scale. They will allow allied countries, in the transition phase we have entered, to provide the first responses to the legitimate need for security expressed by many in Central and Eastem Europe, without initially increasing the factors of tension with Russia.
In this spirit, Russia must be clearly established as a European power, essential to the balance and stability of Europe. Its participation in European security requires a common legal and political framework to open a dialogue in which it expresses itself in its full capacity and in which its own strategic interests are taken into account.


2 REINFORCING THE ROLE OF THE UNITED NATIONS ORGANIZATION The Security Council is the only intemational authority empowered to decide on This recognized universal competence makes it a legitimate body to which States, organizations and sometimes people naturally tum. The action of France, a permanent member of the Security Council, must aim to consolidate its influence, to enable it to face increased responsibilities, thus contributing to The long-term enlargement of the European Union justifies specific action towards the States which are intended to join it. The definition of a particular status of association goes in this direction, just as new cooperation with the countries of Central Europe, initiated for example including jointly by France and Germany, is expected to develop, We do not see, in fact, how, in the long term, the economic area of the European Union and the area concemed by a common security and defense policy could not overlap.
Such an evolution has not yet begun. But reflection on the obligations and responsibilities that would result from this, both for the new States and for the current members of the European Union, must be undertaken in depth. In accordance with its dual vocation as a defense component of the European Union and an instrument for strengthening the European pillar of the Alliance, it must also promote between these rapprochements and Finally, from the narrower point of view of the long-term implementation of defense policy, the objective will be to preserve an effective decision-making process and defense organization, which are a condition for the overall security of Europeans .
The United Nations, in the post-Cold War context, is called upon to play a major political role, in accordance with its vocation as defined in the Charter, in the service of maintaining peace and intemational security, in particular for crisis management around the world. It is still necessary to precisely define the extent and limits of its possibilities and provide it with the means measures of constraint or use of force against a State, outside of actions of individual or collective self-defense falling under Article 51 of the Charter. the evolution of the Alliance. his mission.


the Security Council in the military field itself. The Major Committee provided for by Article 47 of the United Nations Charter has never been convened. Whatever decisions are taken in this regard in the future, the Security Council and the Secretary General of the United Nations must benefit from increased military expertise.
Nevertheless, the natural framework of its responsibility remains more than the maintenance of peace by all the resources of consensus and means of peaceful settlement (Chapter VI of the Charter). advance, in the intemational community, the principles of law that it seeks to promote.
Peacekeeping operations placed under the aegis of the United Nations or directly carried out by them have in fact not only multiplied but also modified in their scale and in their purpose in recent years.
The time is no longer when the mission of the Blue Helmets was limited to relatively simple tasks to define, if not to execute, the prototype of which was the monitoring of a ceasefire line after the interruption of fighting. . To these operations are now added much more complex mandates, ranging from the rehabilitation of a country to its provisional trusteeship, in environments of open conflict, wars or urban guerrillas, and sometimes calling on to several tens of thousands of soldiers. The missions assigned to them are also evolving and the Security Council is relying more on the framework of Chapter VII of the Charter, authorizing, under certain conditions, the use of armed force for the protection of Blue Helmets or even the fulfillment of the mandate. .
France will endeavor to encourage the Security Council to take into account new or more acute risks for intemational security, in particular the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. This is already the subject of a declaration by the Council meeting in a special session of Heads and Govemment on January 31,
1992. The revelation of the scale of Iraqi programs and the application of measures to destroy this potential , provided for by Security Council resolution 687, have shown the usefulness for the latter to have direct access, when necessary, to flexible and effective means of evaluating intelligence and expertise in these areas.
It is also necessary to significantly improve the advice and assistance provided to


place, for operations of any magnitude, of a Special Representative appointed on his the United Nations itself.
France's policy combines three orientations:
United under precise political and organizational conditions. strengthen the military expertise made available to the Security Council proposal.
France's wish, for operations placed under the aegis or the political level in charge of peacekeeping operations and that which ensures its execution. Each Member State will then be able, at a high political level, it is a devolution of political responsibility for the benefit of groups the aegis of and promote better articulation of responsibilities between design and approval of the mandate, major stages of its implementation, control of the African Organization (OAU), in Africa, or to political organizations such as the European Union it can still resort to the means of organizations with a military vocation, such as In the first case, it Depending on the circumstances, the Council may entrust the management of certain crises to regional organizations such as the CSCE, in Europe, and multiply and where, in certain hypotheses, the meeting, command and missions. In addition, contributing countries must be able to ensure through meetings remains assured at the level of the Security Council, the defense organizations not being the coordination of the significant means which are necessary exceed the capacities of recognized regional institutions capable of taking into account the specific dimensions of a crisis or conflict. In the second case, political responsibility their implementation by military means to assert one's will and participate directly in. definition and application experiences have finally shown that it is necessary for the Secretary General to have access to Or charged only with subordinate the participation of French units in Nations operations regular ongoing monitoring of the missions in which they are engaged. Recent ensure the political authority of the Security Council over missions placed under political authority and control capacity at various stages of an operation:
These developments should be encouraged to the extent that requests for direct responsibility of the United Nations, is that the Security Council exercises its military.


the general and specific political objectives of the operation must be set from the outset, constitute an unequivocal reference framework for all contributing countries, and a clear perspective for military officials on the ground. the distribution of responsibilities between the political representatives of the organization and the command of the forces, the organization of the latter, must obey rules highlighting on the one hand the authority of the Secretary General and his representative for the general application of the mandate and on the other hand the specific responsibilities of the military command in the conduct of the military aspects of operations Finally, the participation of French forces will only be considered if the mandate and the operation meet certain political and military criteria, which must be emphasized from the preliminary phase of defining the mission to be carried out.
However, it appears essential, faced with new tasks, to increase its capabilities in the military domain. The responsibilities and skills of the Secretary General's military advisors, for example, must be increased, as well as the means of communication, crisis monitoring, and even contingency planning. The need for reliable and rapid intelligence for the conduct of operations and the security of Blue Helmets can no longer be underestimated. it is appropriate that the principle and level of our commitment correspond to the hierarchy of our strategic priorities and the interests that we intend to defend in the world More generally, the specifically military concems linked to the implementation of the mandates of the Security Council must be taken into greater account and integrated earlier and more continuously into its work and that of the General Secretariat. It is up to potential contributing countries to improve preparation for peacekeeping missions and the system for forecasting the provision of forces. the duration of the participation of French units and the cases of possible withdrawal, if the conditions which prevailed during the initial decision are no longer met, will be determined as much as possible from the outset by the national political authority
:


3 BILATERAL COOPERATION AND DEFENSE AGREEMENTS Security Council. The proactive policy that France advocates in the service of peace and law is thus part of the multilateral framework which gives it all its legitimacy.
Useful, depending on the case, for the security of States, the stability of certain regions such as in Africa, or the modemization of defense systems, bilateral agreements are expected to undergo reorientations. The nature of commitments to the State in defense agreements is not in question, but a new emphasis on the modalities for carrying out missions, in particular the rules of engagement, These provisions will provide a solid and coherent basis for our commitments and will strengthen the effectiveness, and therefore the authority, of the United Nations. They condition our active participation, on a national basis, or within the framework of coalitions or military organizations, in the implementation of the decisions of the.
If defense policy is defined more and more in line with multilateral, even multinational, choices, the existence of a particularly dense diplomatic network, bilateral military cooperation agreements and defense agreements will continue to be for France an important instrument.
The crises that Africa is going through and the considerable uncertainties that characterize its future could encourage a certain disengagement. But it is appropriate to reaffirm the permanent nature of our interest in the continent. The presence will need to be approved at the political, national and multinational level.
In certain areas, the prepositioning of forces govemed by a bilateral agreement makes it possible to clearly demonstrate our commitment and solidarity and to defend our interests, for example a line of communication, while contributing to the prevention and resolution of conflicts, essential to the economic development of the countries concemed.
Furthermore, in many African countries, the presence of military cooperation missions constitutes by nature a means of prevention and a form of prepositioning. In the event of a crisis, they can fulfill a mission of alerting and protecting our nationals. will be focused, with regard to cooperation, on the adaptation of military systems to law and, geographically, on relations with the countries of Central and Eastem Europe.


It is true that the stability of certain sensitive regions has a price, as does the objective of maintaining armaments at the lowest possible level. The response to such requests depends each time on the analysis of our strategic interests, the conditions of intemational security specific to the region and the weight of the resulting obligations. It is also necessary to take into account, with regard to areas of strategic interest, the balance and complementarity, to meet possible operational needs, between the prepositioning of resources and the density of our force projection capabilities .
The new democracies of Central and Eastem Europe, with which a series of bilateral agreements have been concluded in a few years, will benefit from greater priority in the allocation of resources for military cooperation. The share of military aid currently devoted to them represented, in 1993, less than 2% of the overall amount of national military cooperation expenditure.
A barometer of the evolution of these relations, arms control and reduction agreements have enjoyed great success in recent years with the conclusion units, even if redeployments may seem appropriate over a long period, remains necessary. It makes it possible to monitor crisis risks and limit their extent, if necessary, through rapid and limited interventions. Furthermore, raising awareness among African armies about respect for law, their often necessary deflation, the constitution or reconstitution of security forces guaranteeing public order are priorities. This action is essential to enable progress towards democracy and development.
Finally, it should be noted that, in other regions of the world, States are asking France to conclude defense agreements or obtain security guarantees.
Arms control has long been at the center of East-West relations.
4 ARMS CONTROL, DISARMAMENT AND FIGHT AGAINST PROLIFERATION
AGREEMENTS.
The intensification of relations between the armed forces and the ministries of defense of these countries and ours, the multiplication of concrete links at all levels, joint training and exercises are all elements likely to consolidate over time both the democratic evolution of the defense apparatuses of these countries and the feeling of solidarity between France and these States.


A hasty disarmament race, which takes into account neither the effective application of the commitments made nor the current intemational context, could in fact quickly be doomed to failure, or even lead to imbalances of a new type. In fact, if they are the sign of a certain political will to reduce the risks of confrontation and if they participate, in themselves, in the development of collective security based on cooperation, the ambitious intemational agreements of disarmament still need to be implemented. However, there is no shortage of difficulties. successive agreements of previously inconceivable scope in all areas: nuclear weapons, chemical and conventional weapons, confidence-building measures. By the very fact of their success, and because they are part of a context of radical change in strategic data, agreements or regimes for arms control, disarmament and the fight against proliferation find themselves today at the crossroads paths .
The very active phase going from 1987 (Soviet-American agreement on intermediate nuclear forces) to January 1993 (signing of the convention banning chemical weapons in Paris of the START II Treaty between Russians and Americans) corresponded to a moment of particular balance between nations and seeking measures of political and military stability. She seems suspended for a time.
Whether it is the Russian-American agreements, START on nuclear weapons or the chemical weapons convention, the commitments will be long. It is only when they have produced significant effects and when it is possible to draw up an initial assessment, that we will be able to usefully move forward, by identifying the areas where new efforts should be made. disarmament.
Furthermore, in several areas of the fight against proliferation, not all the States directly concemed are parties to the conventions in question ( Chemical Weapons Convention, NPT for nuclear power).
A phase of uncertainties Disarmament comes at a high cost. For the most armed countries, such as Russia, it involves a considerable financial effort, involving both destruction and the reorientation of part of the productive sector. It's a long-term investment. In the short term, it arouses resistance: the application of the first period of reductions, under the Treaty on Conventional Forces in Europe, has


. Reorientations gave rise to demands on the necessary sharing of the burden of destruction between rich countries and countries in transition. Within the framework of the chemical weapons convention, the same type of claim appears, which tends to place on certain States, including France, the responsibility for the destruction of weapons whose accumulation they have always denounced .
Disarmament processes must be strictly controlled to ensure their reality. We must also ensure their security and avoid any risk of leak and dissemination of weapons or technologies. The achievements of some proliferating countries have shown certain limits of the instruments for controlling nuclear technology transfers, even if they constitute a brake. Likewise, due to the dual nature of biological and bacteriological activities, the control provided for in the 1972 convention does not really have any impact on proliferating countries.
The existence of a major and well-defined threat, the concem for the balance of forces between two opposing alliances can no longer serve as a guiding principle for an arms control policy. This now depends on much more complex lines of cleavage. The relations between North and South which, for many, should quickly replace the East-West confrontation, cannot constitute an altemative frame of reference.
The threat of proliferation does not follow a simple geographical or political logic, it requires being addressed at a global level. It requires intemational cooperation. The search for progressively more legally binding agreements must be accompanied by agreed and coordinated policies, both between the States holding sensitive technologies and between these States and those which could be tempted by a proliferation policy .
Some of the political developments resulting from the recomposition of Europe also have consequences. The fate that will ultimately be reserved for the nuclear weapons deployed in Ukraine will have an influence on the economics of the agreements. Likewise, the reduction standards of the CFE Treaty may be called for modifications: Ukraine, for which a number of tanks is planned almost five times higher than that retained for France, may be brought into the framework of the Treaty to further reduce the level of its forces in the future.


A high priority in intemational efforts must, as we see, be given to transparency and verification.
The adoption outside Europe of tools developed within the CSCE (confidence-building measures, limitation of major military equipment, crisis prevention) can offer, according to formulas adapted to local circumstances, a contribution to the stabilization of security situations. crisis and preventing their spread. Reflections within the framework of the Middle East peace process include this dimension.
The transparency effort makes it possible to better understand the defense intentions of the countries participating in it. It has the beginning of universal application with the creation of the Register of arms transfers which gave rise to a first transmission of information in April 1993. Limited for the moment to seven major categories of weapons, the list information to be provided will likely be . New tools A truly European circle in terms of arms control will also be maintained, it will contribute to a form of security assurance for the former allies of the USSR and to the preservation of military stability in Central and Balkan Europe. Military stability and the balance of forces in certain specific sub-regions, in the Balkans, in the Caucasus, can be strengthened.
Existing treaties will have to take into account the evolution of ongoing negotiations (for example: harmonization exercise of the CFE agreements, situation in Ukraine and START agreements) and be supplemented in areas that are still marginal today: so-called inhumane weapons. , modifications of the environment for aggressive purposes etc. The development of military space activities probably calls for the adoption of transparency and confidence-building measures to avoid seeing space in tum enter an arms race. New data on the situation intemational cooperation and the priority attached to the fight against proliferation make it possible to favorably consider the development of a comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty provided that it is universal and verifiable, while ensuring that it does not hinder the maintenance of the credibility of our deterrence. The implementation of the agreements concluded in recent years requires the proper application of verification and confidence-building measures, such as the Open Skies Treaty.
Finally, particular attention will be paid to regional crises and conflicts.


In order to make controls more effective, the extension of the resources of intemational organizations, despite their limits, is a necessary development. A specific intemational body was created to implement the Chemical Weapons Convention. The creation, upon request, of specialized teams for the benefit of the Security Council is a well-suited solution. For ballistic proliferation, in addition to strengthening the provisions of the MTCR regime, increased transparency and monitoring through exchanges of information and technical means of major missile programs in the world are highly desirable. refined and extended. More restrictive measures to restrict transfers, in the name of the fight against excessive accumulation of weapons, should be considered.
Regarding proliferation, it constitutes a real challenge. Controls must focus primarily on nuclear materials, laboratories, transfers of researchers and engineers, sales or transfer of vectors and certain sensitive chemicals.
It must be emphasized, however, that verification, especially when it concems arms control instruments involving a large number of countries, is extremely costly.
This cost can have a dissuasive effect and make certain States hesitate to take this path. This can partly explain the reluctance encountered when developing new conventions. Requests for cost sharing will have to be taken into account in the future.
The role of verification in the effective application of agreements is now widely recognized. Provided for in CSCE documents among the measures intended to strengthen confidence, it is the subject of very precise and binding procedures in the conventional arms control agreements (FCE) or nuclear START).




The missions of the armed forces can be deduced from this set.
Part 2
STRATEGIES AND CAPABILITIES
Chapter 4: Defense strategy France does not have a designated adversary today. Its strategy remains inherently defensive. The concept of conventional and nuclear war or battle which underpins the doctrine of deterrence will continue to inspire it. It remains one of the bases of the essential national consensus on defense matters.
The diversification of threats and risks also leads to defining the main assumptions for engagement of our forces. These make it possible to refine strategic and operational analyses.
But our defense strategy, based on nuclear deterrence, was at the heart of the Cold War, at the height of the bipolar division of the world, the principle of which it rejected. It is therefore natural to question its validity and its possible evolution, taking into account new data from the strategic environment. The future of deterrence and the modalities of our strategic autonomy are at the heart of this reflection.
The objectives assigned to our defense system in this context lead to certain changes in our concepts, particularly with regard to the respective place of nuclear and conventional weapons.


1 A RENEWED STRATEGY
1.1. Principles On the one hand, the one On the other hand, an option focused exclusively on missions to maintain peace and intemational order. It would lead to a model of an expeditionary force, based on two uncertain or dangerous hypotheses: the nation's choice of a policy and the idea that any risk of seeing a major threat reappear against Westem Europe has disappeared. In fact, this strategy would gradually erase nuclear deterrence from the concept of defense and would lead to relying for our defense solely on the guarantees of the Atlantic Alliance, creating dependencies contrary to the principle of our strategic autonomy .
It is important to define a general model consistent with our objectives and adapted to the new situation. Strategic developments do not modify the principles of nuclear deterrence, but can influence our posture and our needs. Above all, a different balance is emerging between deterrence and action in the missions of our forces, which partly modifies the role of conventional means.
A balanced defense model The purpose of the defense strategy, in accordance with the objectives defined above, is to ensure the defense of France's vital interests, to consolidate its European choice and to respond to its intemational vocation. Both a power and a maritime power, our country must be able to defend its interests, alone or in participation, in many regions of the world, without claiming a capacity for global action. This results both from the geographical location of our country, the nature of its strategic needs and its power responsibilities. These fundamental objectives lead to the choice of a balanced model which excludes two extremes. strategy focused exclusively on the protection of the national territory. This withdrawal option would in theory be conceivable after the dtente resulting from the withdrawal of the armies of the former USSR. But it would imply a large renunciation of France's vocation and its rank.
Our means of defense will have to face much more diverse scenarios than in the past, often different from those for which they have been used until now.


Only a balanced model, However, most conflicts do not seem likely to take, at least initially, a form calling into question our vital interests, even if the risks of escalation cannot be neglected.
Beyond the diversity and often unpredictable nature of crises, we must of our strategy crises and operations, due to the remoteness of the threats, take place more often at a significant distance from the national territory. This development has serious consequences, for example with regard to the choice of our means or the nature of relationships with establish, where applicable, between the forces that would be projected and our nuclear deterrent New factors the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction may make it necessary over time while waiting and preparing for major confrontation, the prevention and management of long crises, of varying intensities, now dominate, requiring instruments that we do not always possess;
These new features call for military and our forces system. our independence and allowing our participation in intemational stability, seems able to respond to the interests and ambitions of our country in the changing environment which characterizes the new strategic era. must quickly take into account its main characteristics. our means of prevention and action will be used, in the vast majority of cases, in concert with our partners or allies, in multinational groups;
especially note the following features: time for specific protection strategies and measures.


well said :
Such an evolution leads to two series of consequences A new complementarity between deterrence and action Our autonomy These two motivations are affected by recent intemational developments. The first, due to the disappearance of the Soviet Union, seems to have become less pressing. The second becomes essential.
The possession of an independent nuclear weapon, adapted as necessary to the strategic risks which will prevail in the years to come, will remain an essential means for France to have the margin of freedom it needs to defend its interests. National independence, and that of Europe in the future, are undoubtedly linked to the possession of such weapons. in will be in this framework of intelligence of situations, in particular through intelligence which allows prediction and autonomous assessment of events and thus gives the ability to decide quickly, by making informed choices But the conditions of strategic autonomy can be partially modified. In the next ten years, this will no longer rely solely on nuclear deterrence, the role of these weapons becoming, even temporarily, less of a threat against our vital interests. dependent on our central, for at least two reasons One has faded or moved away. On the other hand, the resources of the armies are and will, nevertheless, be heavily requested for extemal missions of crisis prevention and resolution, without direct risk of nuclear escalation or prospect of total war . to master all key functions, excluding nuclear France's fundamental choice, in 1959, in favor of the nuclear strategy was based on a double foundation: the desire to protect our vital interests against threats from more powerful countries; the concem to ensure in all circumstances our independence and our freedom of political action.


strategic mobility, to be free of our movements, and to be able to Thus each category of armament is experiencing an evolution: nuclear systems must guarantee the credibility of deterrence in more diversified circumstances than previously conventional means are called upon to play their own strategic role in certain cases.
The association of deterrence and action in our world thus seems to be evolving towards a new level. The emphasis, in the new context, is placed more on the second term but, at the same time, limits are set in the face of the multiplication of intervention risks: a clear hierarchy of priorities must be respected in the extemal defense of our interests, first and foremost mastery of complex situations, where political, military and regional dimensions combine from a strategy point of view, multinational and joint dimensions in the military domain ringed to evolve. In the 1972 conception, even conventional military means were integrated into the general maneuver of deterrence, nuclear and conventional forces being in particular very closely associated in the major scenario of total commitment in Europe. Conventional capabilities had been sized and organized first to constitute the non-immediately nuclear aspect of deterrence, then only to deal with the defense of our interests and our commitments in the world. The priorities in defining the role of conventional weapons are now reversed compared to the definition in the 1972 White Paper, due to geostrategic developments. defense The connection between nuclear moves and conventional moves is East Since the vital interests of France are no longer immediately threatened but on the other hand those of the intemational community on which our security depends are, it is not abnormal that the conventional forces engaged in the service of collective security tend to occupy a more central place. Ultimately, nuclear deterrence, in these cases, guarantees that conventional forces will not be circumvented: the role that these had during the war then played by nuclear forces there is no break in the strategy, but evolution of the respective roles of nuclear means and conventional means depending on the scenarios. project forces in a timely manner to the right place.


. Evolution of the context New risks are likely to materialize at the start of the next century with proliferation.
There is a high probability that a small number will continue their work and then succeed, despite controls whose vital and strategic interests; deterrence itself remains the basis of our strategy; emphasis will also be placed on prevention in the defense concept.
Nuclear deterrence is based on the perception by any adversary of the unacceptable risks, out of proportion to the stakes of the conflict, that an aggression against our country would entail. The intensity of the destructive effects of nuclear weapons and the terror they inspire have given the classic military notion of deterrence a radical, previously unknown strategic scope. This is why the French nuclear strategy is a strategy of deterrence, rejecting any confusion between deterrence and employment.
Before describing the concept adopted in more detail, it is useful to measure the possible impact of the main changes in the intemational environment on our military nuclear policy and strategy. The most generally invoked concem the evolution of threats after the disappearance of the Soviet Union, the promises of disarmament, the prospects of the European project and the progress of conventional weapons.
The evolution of threats and risks. The Cold War is over but the nuclear age continues. Our nuclear force was centered on the conventional and nuclear threat represented by the Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact, and the characteristics of our systems, always established according to an assessment of sufficiency, were essentially a function of the defensive systems of this State. This central justification may seem less relevant. Russia today is a factor of uncertainty and risk, not a threat. However, we cannot ignore the permanence of an overpowering potential in the east of the European continent. This arsenal is also, at present, partially distributed between several States, which is rather a factor of increase than of reduction of risk.
1.2. Nuclear deterrence


East
THE This development does not in itself entail any doctrinal change on our part. It is always a question of deterring the adversary by the threat of unacceptable damage.
Deterrence, to maintain its relevance and effectiveness, must be able to remain credible in all cases. The scenarios in which it can be exercised are diversifying: relations with current or new great powers, relations with regional powers which could jeopardize our vital interests. volume of our own forces. This, in accordance with the principle of determined by the capacity to inflict unacceptable damage on any aggressor and not by a concem for balance between which makes little sense with regard to nuclear weapons. If this volume can vary depending on the density and efficiency of the defense systems to be crossed, it is in no way proportional to the size of the opposing offensive arsenal.
Surface-to-surface tactical nuclear weapons, conventional potentials and chemical weapons have been the subject of reduction or elimination decisions as appropriate. intemational, nuclear capacity. The possession, by medium powers, of rudimentary weapons capable of reaching European territory, a zone of strategic interest or forces projected abroad, must be considered now. We must also take into account the risks that the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction could represent for our vital interests, However desirable it may be, such a development would have no impact on the disarmament. This first deeply benefits the European continent, a place where formidable arsenals have been accumulating for forty years.
The American and Russian central arsenals are themselves affected, in particular by the Start II agreements. If they are implemented, the decisions of the two powers which initiated the nuclear overload will result in a 70% reduction in the number of their strategic weapons to reach figures of 3,000 to 3,500 warheads. The structure of arsenals would be permanently affected, with the suppression and banning of surface-to-surface ballistic missiles with multiple independently guided warheads as well as mobile strategic missiles. The evolution of the range of so-called tactical machines is more difficult to assess, because it is not the subject of a contractual commitment. or biological.


The European project. The problem of a European nuclear doctrine is set to become one of the major questions in the construction of a common European defense. The acuteness of the subject will become clearer as the European Union realizes its political identity at the same time as its security and defense identity. Such a perspective remains distant, but must not be lost sight of. of The dialogue initiated with Great Britain, which has begun to take this dimension into account, must be continued and deepened. This does not exclude exchanges with other partners.
This does not mean, however, that a new role for non-nuclear means does not , as has been said, need to be clarified.
The analysis of the developments which have just been described demonstrates both the relevance of the concept of deterrence and the merits of the French choice in favor of nuclear armament.
The success of theses on conventional deterrence. They are based on the idea that certain sophisticated conventional technologies would confer radical superiority on those who possess them, making it possible to extremely reduce, or even eliminate, the share of nuclear power in defenses. It is illusory and dangerous to claim that they could have the effect, like nuclear weapons, of preventing war. They all argue in the opposite direction. These conceptions promote the balance of conventional forces, by nature unstable and based on strategies of employment, preparation and conduct of war. They suggest the possibility of resolving intemational problems through the use of force and lead to the arms race. They are not compatible with our strategy. Far from replacing nuclear deterrence, a so-called conventional deterrent would only add to it. to the Deterrence concept However, there will only be a European nuclear doctrine, a European deterrent, when there are vital European interests, considered as such by Europeans and understood as such by others. Until then, France does not intend to dilute the means of its national defense in such an area under any pretext.
With nuclear power, in fact, Europe's autonomy in defense matters is possible.
Without him, she is excluded.


politician is able to credibly threaten him with recourse to sovereignty, the integrity of the national territory, its dependencies and its approaches to fear an adversary, out of relation to the issue of a conflict. if he tries to get away and varied, but persistent or perhaps increasing over the foreseeable period. Furthermore, too precise a definition of these interests (see chapter 2) which relate to freedom whatever the geostrategic developments, maintaining a double credibility, to the threat, in order to prevent the political authority from finding itself in an impasse and Our deterrence system must be reserved for the protection of our interests strategic remains, at the political level, as a major element of the independence of to do mark, when the time comes, in various situations, the limit of these vital interests the will and virtue of preventing general war, of making recourse to war inconceivable to the various situations she may have to face. This may involve strike unbearable for him in view of the stakes. The French political authority must our vital interests. Only nuclear weapons today have such a capacity in appreciation of the highest authorities of Nevertheless, the free exercise of our nuclear weapons remain the means of compensating, if necessary, for possible inadequacies damage political and Any adversary must acquire the conviction that the authority As just recalled, the concept of deterrence is unchanged. He assumes,
THE vital, whatever the origin and form of the threat. There is no need to give and to unambiguously recall our determination: this is the role of the ultimate be it and what else be its The need for nuclear weapons in the new context in particular that these means are always above the threshold of sufficiency in relation to have at all times the necessary means that are both safe and suitable will continue to define itself because of their destructive and unstoppable power. This is why they also have In retum for this uncertainty, we must have a capacity to waming. has in other areas and helps avoid a conventional arms race, total as an active means of politics (White Paper 1972). paralyzed.
France, on a military level facing less immediate risks than previously, more diffuse air and sea constitute its heart. contrary to our defense policy and unbearable in terms of


Posture of nuclear forces alert levels, like the number of submarines at sea, are modulated the consistency of the arsenal must be able to adapt to changes in the intemational situation, to technical progress, to the state of the defenses of potential adversaries, while respecting the principle of sufficiency The essential role of nuclear deterrence in our defense policy goes hand in hand with our capacity for technological evolution, depending on adaptation to variations in the intemational context or scientific and technical mutations. Otherwise, the long-term credibility of deterrence would certainly be compromised. In this context, the test simulation program constitutes a priority, already implemented in the 1994 budget, and which will have to be reinforced in the following years. nuclear forces must be permanently capable of fulfilling two the credibility of our dissuasive posture rests on the provision of sufficiently flexible and diversified means, offering, when the time comes, differentiated options to the Head of It is appropriate to draw general conclusions on our means from the situation which
has just been described:
If the main principles of the deterrence strategy remain, to the extent that they correspond to the permanent needs of the nuclear age, the same cannot be said of the means which serve it and their posture. inflict a strike causing unacceptable damage and likely to be carried out secondly carry out a limited strike on military objectives with a view to
functions: the final waming; with those of threats.


role in our strategy in three forms, prevention, action and protection. prevent the use of force prevent the occurrence of potentially dangerous situations and threats conventional. It is now their use outside of a strictly speaking nuclear context which dominates, even if it is appropriate to foresee, particularly at the beginning of the next century, hypotheses where we would contribute to multinational interventions in crises where powers would be involved. regional nuclear weapons, or even, in the longer term, the reappearance of a major threat against Westem Europe. direct or indirect Prevention The function of prohibiting the circumvention of nuclear deterrence is indeed This is a priority aspect of our defense strategy, also the one where our inadequacies are undoubtedly the most obvious. The range of modes of action is extensive: diplomatic, economic, politico-military, military, etc.
1.3. A new strategy for using conventional moveys heard maintained, but becomes second in relation to the capacity to participate in the resolution of regional crises. This means that conventional means are now defined firstly by their ability to contribute to the prevention, limitation or settlement by force, if necessary, of these crises or regional conflicts which do not present the risk of escalation to extremes. If this last scenario arises, these same means regain their traditional function in the deterrent maneuver, by materializing the desire to defend our vital interests and by allowing us to test the determination and the means of the possible aggressor.
Within the framework thus drawn, conventional means are called upon to play a role These means can be implemented for, in particular A true conversion must be carried out nro-essively in the role of


. To ensure prevention in the medium term, technical military cooperation and the prepositioning of forces are the main instruments for Defense. The relevance of the deployment of our prepositioned forces in relation to our strategic interests as well as the effectiveness and modalities of technical cooperation will be regularly reassessed. contain crises and conflicts at the lowest possible level. . Their long-term prevention of course involves favoring non-military means.
The strengthening of arms control, disarmament, transparency and verification agreements clearly goes in this direction. From the point of view of defense policy, the development, deployment and exploitation of intelligence means appear crucial for the prevention, forecasting and understanding of conflicts, the evaluation of the effectiveness of prevention strategies, finally the preparation and, where applicable, the conduct of actions. Intelligence intervenes in fact, at all stages.
Short-term crisis prevention, finally, relies on the progressive activation of prepositioning means, on operational assistance actions with, where appropriate, the implementation of special operations, as well as demonstration and presence of naval, air or land assets, also making it possible to exercise a threat of intervention or retaliation. bring out new characteristics compared to the period which has just ended:
The means of prevention can be distinguished depending on whether we intend to take long-term, medium-term or short-term action on the risks of crises or conflicts .
The use of forces prepositioned or deployed for the occasion can be used for dissuasive purposes. If it fails, strategy enters the realm of action.
The hypotheses for the use of our forces and the evolution of the strategic concept make . The action .


combat actions or the importance of acquiring a margin of technological superiority in the in response to an attack or on occasion armed to stop the conventional domain, which logically results from the partial decoupling between the limited military action aims to keep an open or emerging crisis at its
THE forces conventional and nuclear means, characteristic of the new situation maintaining or reestablishing the under the aegis of the French emphasizes limiting conflict, not supporting wars making it possible to significantly reduce the opposing military potential. For the appearance of missions of a new type, on the occasion of the increased role of to actions to maintain order, even complex and dangerous for the lives of peacekeeping operations to guarantee stability and security Essentially, such actions can only be considered if they are undertaken under intemational; these missions require specialized resources, adapted to the aegis of an intemational organization competent to authorize such use of the growing requirement for combined actions on the dual joint plan and low or medium intensity contexts, halfway between war strength In all these cases, the Having in mind these different lessons, several modalities of action multinational United Nations or more closely related regional organizations such as the CSCE long, uncertain and costly conventional agreements.
are retained: lowest possible level, either by preemptive action or by retaliatory acts, an extemal intervention under intemational mandate; open and a state of peace, in often urban and complex environments. men, than acts of war.


The risks induced by the various forms of proliferation cannot be combatted by a single type of response. It is appropriate to call upon a broad spectrum of modes of action, combining preventive measures, intemational sanctions, the exercise of deterrence and finally the use of certain means of defense themselves .
Protection The proliferation of nuclear, biological and chemical weapons of mass destruction, whether or not associated with ballistic vectors, will pose new problems for our defense apparatus, both for the protection of the territory and for that of forces deployed abroad. This challenge also concems most European and Atlantic Alliance countries.
Given the variety of forms that threats can take, weapons that can be carried by very diverse vectors, mainly aircraft, aerobic missiles, ballistic missiles, priority will be given in this area to the study of a concept and means of expanded air defense.
Protection constitutes a dimension of France's strategy which also calls for modemization. The protection of the national territory and its approaches is a permanent mission of the armed forces and a constant objective of our defense policy.
A balance must then be sought in the military strategy to be defined to respond to these threats, between the exercise of deterrence, prevention and interdiction actions , and possible defenses. In the field of anti-missile warfare, the study of these concems, at this stage, air defense and detection capabilities, particularly space. This area represents a real technological one on the horizon of the White Paper. The development of certain air defense systems, for which programs are underway, into anti-missile systems is also being studied and will be encouraged.


Six scenarios for the use of the armies and the national gendarmerie have been retained; they attempt to cover the range of the main hypotheses, in the absence of a designated adversary and an easily measurable threat.
At the meeting point of the main trends in strategic development and the main directions of our defense strategy, it is possible to describe the hypotheses for the employment of our forces considered to be the most plausible. Such a method cannot claim to be exhaustive, but the selection of scenarios is already the mark of certain choices.
The first criterion is a concem for consistency with the analysis of threats and risks over the period covered by this work. It was thus taken into account, firstly, on the one hand the degree of plausibility of the events envisaged, on the other hand the type of decisions which would then be taken by French officials, alone or, in the majority of cases, with their foreign partners. In this regard, the strong possibility of regional crises or conflicts from the start of the period, in the new intemational situation, leads to placing the corresponding scenarios at the forefront, while the possibility of a reappearance of a major threat against Westem Europe, of the type of the Warsaw Pact, very unlikely over a relatively long period, was considered as a separate hypothesis, not decisive to date for defining conventional forces. It also leads to the provision of a specific concept of format change.
The level of obligations to which France would be held is also taken into consideration. This is why two of the main hypotheses of purely national commitment of the country - threat of aggression on overseas departments and territories, bringing into play defense agreements - appear in this table. Their probabilities of occurrence are extremely different. But, in both cases, a reaction from our forces would be imperative.
This instrument seemed useful, both to expose, more concretely than on the basis of sole principles, the challenges of our defense, and to refine the analyses, verify the coherence of our defense concepts, and gradually determine the best adapted strategic balance . to situations.
2 ASSUMPTIONS FOR EMPLOYMENT OF FORCES


our vital interests are at stake These hypotheses are neither designed nor presented simply as crisis scenarios whose possible outcome(s) must be described. They include a brief appreciation of the type of possible responses, the objectives that would be sought, the strategy that would be applied.
For France, the areas of priority interest that could be affected by such events are located in Europe, the Mediterranean and the Middle East. The need for more distant projections, of the order of 5,000 to 7,000 km, cannot be excluded.
Scenario 1 Conflict The regional threat would be constituted by conventional forces often equivalent, in volume and at least partially in nature, to those of Westem nations. The arsenals already include and will increasingly include certain high-level modem equipment, such as ballistic or aerobic weapons, chemical or biological weapons, submarines. The considered potentials reach The density of French engagement and the intensity of the fighting or violence constitute a third parameter. The different types of action, as outlined above, are taken into account from peacekeeping operations to total war.
The assertion of regional powers with considerable conventional means is expected to grow over the period, despite the implementation of arms control agreements.
Conflicts between regional powers are likely to challenge our strategic interests indirectly or directly. Intemational interventions aimed at ensuring the reestablishment of peace and intemational law may involve confrontations with such powers.
Finally, it is necessary to indicate a difference in nature between two of the scenarios and the not putting This iterative process, which will be deepened and extended during defense planning and programming, will enable. to facilitate the determination of the required capabilities of the armies and the national gendarmerie mentioned in the following chapter. It must be emphasized from the outset that these require, in most scenarios, resources drawn from both the projection forces, the means permanently ensuring the security of the country and the support structures. others, depending on whether or not our vital interests are at stake.


avoid the extension of a localized conflict to an entire region This hypothesis can therefore lead to high-intensity commitments. the projection of forces, on the ground, implying being able to deploy command, combat and support resources in relation to the role we intend to play in the coalition.
In this type of conflict, two series of options are possible and can also be
combined over time: often several thousand tanks, several hundred planes and helicopters. Under these conditions, the risks weighing on our interests, our supply routes or even the countries to which we are linked by a defense agreement are significant. Our participation in an intemational action could also result in reprisals on national territory or against our nationals abroad, in particular through acts of terrorism. put force an aggressor to respect intemational resolutions. to extemal aggression and restore the sovereignty of a State ensure the freedom of movement of our strategic supplies In the event of intervention, our forces would act under an intemational mandate within the framework of the Atlantic Alliance, the Westem European Union, ultimately the European Union, or finally a coalition. They would contribute to the achievement of one
or more of the following objectives:
Several characteristics emerge from this scenario and must be highlighted. power projection, without sending ground troops, but which can quickly include the use of suitable superiority weapons, or the action of special forces Such a conflict, which does not involve a nuclear risk, is likely to occur both in Europe, which is a new fact compared to the previous situation, and outside Europe, in the aforementioned regions. Taking into account the risk represented by non-nuclear weapons of mass destruction is a necessity. The framework


A similar situation is already possible on the European continent, but could also apply, in the longer term, in the Mediterranean, the Near and Middle East.
For the intemational community, the objective should be, from the start of the crisis, to avoid an uncontrolled evolution of the situation. France would then act within a multinational framework, within the Atlantic Alliance, the Westem European Union or, ultimately, the European Union. policy of force action and the objectives pursued must be directly related to our strategic interests. The nature, intensity and duration of the conflict can vary greatly.
This hypothesis takes into account the possibility, in the next twenty years, of seeing European security seriously threatened by a regional conflict involving a nuclear power and involving, therefore, the risk, in sequence, of calling into question our vital interests.
Whatever the qualitative and quantitative level of the risks incurred, the difference compared to the first scenario lies in the risk of destabilization and rise to extremes, which could degenerate and possibly jeopardize our vital interests, particularly the national territory . force an aggressor to give up his ambitions
Scenario 2 Conflict that could jeopardize our vital interests preserve stability by delivering a strong military signal In addition to the threats identified in the previous scenario, there would be increased risks incurred by our forces, including nuclear ones.
The intervention decision should meet specific objectives:
The degree of probability of this scenario is high in the short and medium term.


of the national territory outside A dissuasive maneuver, adapted to this particular context, could be necessary to support our decision to engage. The possession of nuclear weapons gives France a special place in any coalition, whatever the level of its participation. The nature of the risks incurred may lead, if a deployment decision is taken, to immediately projecting forces with heavy and well-protected resources.
In this hypothesis, a threat against our overseas departments and territories is envisaged, which can take several forms: direct aggression with a territorial aim, an unlikely event, or indirect destabilizing actions on the territory concemed .
This scenario is, according to analyzes of the evolution of threats, considered plausible in the medium term, in particular from the tum of the century. Among its specific characteristics, it is necessary to note the high degree of risks for the national territory and its dependencies: acts of terrorism, nuclear blackmail, air or, ultimately, ballistic attacks, attempts to destabilize institutions.
A determined aggressor would perhaps have the advantage of surprise, but would itself, in the majority of cases, encounter significant problems linked to the projection of forces , taking into account the intervention distances, access and delivery times.
The exercise of the deterrence strategy in such a context is consistent with the concept explained above. It implies the refusal of any nuclear battle, the rapid implementation of means of technological superiority, the refusal of prolonged conventional war. interpose between belligerents, if necessary by force, to initiate conflict or, at least, contain it within certain limits France must be able, in complete independence and despite possible intemational pressure, to control and resolve this type of conflict. These territories are first covered by deterrence. For an intervention intended to preserve or
Scenario 3 Achievement if necessary, destroy the forces of an aggressor or belligerents.


This type of intervention should be considered to prevent or put an end to low-intensity regional conflicts such as those shaking Africa. France will retain the capacity to act alone. However, increased involvement of the United Nations may be sought, while the definition of a common security policy with the countries of the European Union may lead in the future to involve our partners more than they were until now. 'now. If sub-Saharan Africa is today the privileged zone for this type of action, it cannot be excluded that the network of bilateral agreements may modify, in particular according to new decisions, modifications of prepositioning, or the evolution threats to our areas of strategic interest.
A dynamic prevention policy remains the best solution. It will rely either on forces prepositioned in the country itself or nearby and capable of intervening from the start of a conflict, or on reception structures capable of receiving reinforcements from the mainland or from a neighboring country. There re-establish our sovereignty, sufficiently diversified and trained means of projection are therefore necessary. Specific measures must be taken to strengthen the protection of the territory against actions of subversion or terrorism. enario 4 Implementation of bilateral defense agreements The framework for such a scenario is that which corresponds to the defense agreements that we have already signed or that we could conclude, in the future, with friendly countries. It requires us, in general, to react vigorously, within very short deadlines. It should be noted, however, that not all situations have the same impact on our strategic interests, so the response must be adapted to each situation.
Intemational or regional constraints must also be taken into account.
The probability of such an assumption of employment of our forces is very high and can occur without delay. In the current state of the agreements, it does not present any major danger because, most often, the forces to be confronted will only have reduced military capabilities. Such a conflict could, however, hamper our supplies and the risk of getting stuck cannot be ruled out.
The probability of such a scenario, relatively low today, may increase over time.


Operations in favor of peace and intemational law will take multiple forms, such as interposition between belligerents, with or without a real cessation of hostilities, control of land, air and maritime borders, and the conduct of operations of a strictly humanitarian nature. , the restoration of communications security, the monitoring of a ceasefire, etc.
The intervention may aim for one or more objectives: restoration of the territorial integrity of the friendly country, interposition with a view to putting an end to a conflict, protection of local populations and retum to civil peace. Furthermore, the case of the evacuation of French or foreign nationals will frequently arise. Finally, we cannot exclude having to manage several crises of this nature simultaneously.
It should be emphasized that the required military capabilities can become very specific and the actions very constrained, due for example to the definition of missions, the nature of the confrontations, the desire to minimize losses in and intemational law in favor of the power of the means deployed in a timely manner will guarantee a rapid outcome of the conflict.
The French contribution to the settlement of such situations is only considered within an intemational political framework (UN, CSCE, etc.) and in a multinational military context (NATO, WEU, coalitions). We must not underestimate the difficulty of apprehending and managing a crisis, of carrying out low-intensity operations, in environments of latent or open war, of guerrilla warfare, particularly urban warfare, since the military power of the belligerents can be very variable .
Scenario 5 Essentially foreseeable in Europe, the Middle East or Africa, such actions are also possible in the Far East, or even in Latin America. The probability of having to participate in operations of this type, and even several simultaneously around the world, is, today, very high.
This type of crisis can last from a few weeks to several months and, upon conclusion, force us to leave forces behind for an indefinite period.


Very unlikely today, this scenario remains unlikely over the considered horizon.
He ... not
Scenario 6 of a major threat against Such a threat would be based on the adversary's ability to implement all possible modes of action, direct or indirect: means of selective or massive nuclear strikes, high-tech conventional forces, means of intemal subversion. The risk that this threat actually materializes may arise in Europe but also, in the long term, outside Europe. human lives in our ranks, among the possible adversary and especially in civilian life. westem This scenario aims to take into account the possibility of a reappearance, in the next twenty years, of the threat of major aggression against Westem Europe, from a State or a coalition with significant nuclear forces. and conventional and manifesting hegemonic ambitions. Its effective implementation depends largely on the evolution of security structures in Europe. In any event, France must retain, over the period considered, the means to preserve its vital interests.
A resolute prevention strategy should, however, make it possible to limit this risk. In the event of failure, it would be up to nuclear deterrence to prevent the threat from being carried out. Failing this, the exercise of the dissuasive maneuver, once decided, could lead France to immediately engage alongside its allies with a significant capacity, possibly at a great distance from the national territory, depending on the location of the threat.
Not posing a major threat to our interests, this scenario could nevertheless evolve towards a stalemate that is increasingly demanding in terms of resources. It is therefore essential to clarify, from the start of the action, the criteria justifying our commitment and to try to evaluate its foreseeable duration. It can also lead to a regional conflict which then becomes difficult to control and retums to the first scenarios. be discarded. because it poses a deadly risk.


1) The hypotheses are neither exclusive nor completely independent of each other. Several share risks of harm to the integrity of the territory or its population. The use of the national gendarmerie and, by partial or total mobilization, of third category forces could then be necessary.
3) The scenario of reappearance of a major threat against Westem Europe leads to the use of a new concept of force constitution and change of format. The implementation of the latter will depend on the growing assertiveness and characteristics of such a threat.
However, the reappearance of this should take sufficient time for it to be possible to proceed, if necessary, to a progressive adaptation and a change of format of our defense tool, based on appropriate measures taken from time to time. of peace. The political authority must decide, when the time comes, the measures that the evolution and characteristics of the threat would impose. In this regard, the difficulty will be to effectively constitute an adapted system of forces, as and when such a threat arises.
Above all, experience already shows that France can be led to take several actions simultaneously. The combination of its possible commitments must be precisely delimited. Apart from the last scenario, it may consist of participation in a high-intensity regional conflict, requiring significant military resources, while continuing to honor its defense agreements as well as the integrity of its overseas possessions, and maintaining its contribution to humanitarian actions or relief operations 2) High priority must be given to certain objectives, essential in the context of prevailing uncertainties, and useful to all forces: significant and autonomous capabilities for forecasting and evaluating situations through intelligence capabilities for command and control of operations the aptitude for projection resulting from mobility and means of superiority interoperability which is the consequence of the pre-eminence of multilateral frameworks for the employment of forces.
A first exploitation of these various hypotheses immediately leads to three
series of conclusions:


The implementation of such a program will require the meeting of several conditions: a proactive political process, a capacity for analysis in advance of the resurgence of threats, sufficient implementation deadlines but compatible with the deadlines for realizing the risks .
The difficulty of determining now with precision the volume and nature of the forces necessary in this hypothesis is obvious. But the legal, economic, industrial and military measures essential to carrying out, if necessary, a force-building and format change program must be studied and decided. Nuclear forces cannot be affected by such provisions because, protecting our vital interests, they must constantly be able to adapt to changing threats. Not all sectors of conventional means are affected in the same way either. The consequences and constraints on personnel and equipment policies are also differentiated.
This new notion is clearly distinguished from the classic one of build-up, which only designates operations to put units on a war footing in the entire peacetime format. The increase in power actually consists of summoning, through mobilization, the personnel necessary for the three armies and the gendarmerie to bring them up to 100% of their combat potential. It will sometimes be necessary to carry out such a partial or total increase in power, in certain cases covered by scenarios S 1 to S5.
The study of scenarios thus proves necessary for defining the capabilities of future armed forces and for the evolution of the current model. However, it is appropriate to first draw the consequences of the preceding analyzes on the statement of the missions of the armed forces.
The format resulting from the most likely missions and hypotheses of action in the coming armies only partially takes into account except for deterrence, command and intelligence the possibility of reappearance of a threat of comparable magnitude to that which represented the Soviet Union. A reconfiguration of our conventional apparatus would be necessary to achieve the stature and qualities appropriate to circumstances of this kind if such a threat re-emerges.




implementing the defense of the national territory, its air and maritime spaces, in the face of diverse threats, including terrorism.
3.2. Contribute to the security and defense of through participation in development preventing the emergence of any stability in Europe: in the Mediterranean and the Middle East institutions and govemment, in all circumstances, in the face of all direct or indirect threats
3.1. Preserve the vital interests of France against all forms contributing to maintaining the continuity and freedom of operation of And common. in Organized, equipped and trained to deal with much more numerous and varied employment hypotheses than in the past, they must develop or acquire the operational and logistical capabilities necessary for the execution of the four main categories of missions assigned to them . assigned. guaranteeing the integrity of the national territory, the freedom of citizens, the sovereignty and the means of development of the nation, while maintaining the credibility of our deterrence, through the combined use of nuclear and conventional means Guarantors of France's security, the armed forces demonstrate, by their existence and their nature, the nation's desire to defend and contribute, through their action, to the implementation of govemment objectives in favor of peace, maintaining stability in the world and respect for intemational law.
3 MISSIONS OF THE ARMED FORCES
in : of a The new strategic framework, resulting from the analysis of force employment scenarios and renovated defense concepts, leads to redefining the missions of the armed forces. This definition takes into account permanent factors and new objectives of defense policy. has Mediterranean. in the defense _


intemational in:
territory. and in : honoring its defense and cooperation agreements strengthening cooperation and exchanges, in all areas, with our partners moveus and oreanizations normally technological, major risks)
3.4. Carry out service tasks promoting the development of a European defense identity, by its supplies of the civil defense of circumstances, the protection of populations (natural disasters or respect for the law, under the aegis of the United Nations or other participating in the protection of civil organizations, installations or means which participating, where applicable, in the security of public authorities and being able to participate in operations for the maintenance of peace and
3.3. Contribute to actions in favor of peace and respect for the law participating in humanitarian actions decided by organizations defense condition the maintenance of activities essential to the life of populations and their relevant intemational organizations competent, the prevention and relief measures required, in all ensuring France's presence in the world, ensuring respect for its in particular by strengthening the contributing to the prevention or resolution of crises, in particular by taking, in matters of civil protection and at the request of the authorities takes part in military actions of varying nature, intensity and duration Atlantic. of the Westem European Union sovereignty where it is exercised, protecting its nationals and its interests, notably intemational or at the request of the States and countries concemed. in the event of aggression, by participating in the defense of Europe, within the Alliance administrations.






76
Chapter 5 Armed Forces Capabilities Their establishment will be done gradually, on the one hand by making the necessary changes in certain priority areas, and on the other hand by acquiring all the capacities necessary to respond to the diversity of foreseeable situations .
The objectives assigned to our defense and the strategic principles which were one or more interventions for the benefit of an overseas department or territory or in application of defense agreements 2) The capabilities of the forces engaged by France will be closely linked to the place we intend to hold in cases where the action is multinational. Several hypotheses can in fact be considered, depending on whether its contribution is guided by the desire to simply demonstrate its presence, the emphasis then being placed on the specificity and quality of the means, or whether it intends to hold a significant place in the system. , the volume criterion then coming into play, or finally, particularly within the framework of a European coalition, that it is led to play a determining role. In 1) The analysis of force employment hypotheses highlighted the importance of regional conflicts in our resources. It also shows the need to plan for the simultaneity of several actions: these are realities that France already knows. Under these conditions, future planning of the capacities of the armies and the gendarmerie must allow, apart from the case of the major conflict in Europe, the simultaneous conduct of several types of engagements of different intensities:
The definition of these capacities results more particularly from taking into account presented in the previous chapter determine the models of future armies. a limited operation in favor of peace or intemational law.
of three data: a high intensity regional conflict, within the framework of a coalition


finally, the capabilities relating to the general environment of the forces.
77
1 THE NEW PRIORITY CAPACITIES 3) The ability to respond to the different force employment hypotheses is not enough to determine the army model. It indeed presupposes the existence of a permanent system, making it possible to ensure nuclear deterrence and territorial protection, to participate in crisis prevention and to provide public authorities with the immediate assistance they may need. All of these means constitute security, the existence of which is inseparable from that of projectable forces which are intended to act outside the territory. Likewise, the means necessary for training, supporting and managing the forces are essential.
In an intemational environment characterized by uncertainty, it is hardly possible to predict in advance the areas of engagement, the nature of threats and the form of operations. At most, we can deduce from recent experiences that these engagements will take place far from our borders, in complex political and military situations requiring both perfect knowledge of these situations in real time and close control of our forces engaged in the field. ground. the capabilities linked to the permanent security posture, which will enable us to carry out the missions essential to the preservation of our vital interests. This posture also provides the administrative and technical structures necessary for a possible change in the format of our armies if a threat out of proportion to the chosen model were to appear (scenario S6) in certain circumstances, in fact, France may be required to provide the central element of a European action, jointly with one of its main partners.
From these elements, it is possible to present all of these capabilities in four
main categories: the action and support capabilities specific to projectable forces, capable of acting wherever France's interest requires it the new priority capabilities of intelligence, command and projection, required in most situations, essential to their understanding and action;


78 a) The qualities of an intelligence system must allow political power to have waming signals and the means to interpret them in good time. This requires a complex network of technical and human elements, sufficient and coherent with each other, making it possible to see, listen, understand, communicate and evaluate the information collected.
Goals Its consideration in defense policy is undergoing a change under the double effect of the collapse of the Soviet Union, followed by the end of the Cold War, and the Gulf War, the consequences of which lessons have revealed certain inadequacies, both in terms of forecasting and crisis management.
Intelligence, command and means of projection are three fundamental capabilities with which armies must be equipped or which must be reinforced as a priority.
A strategic instrument Intelligence is no longer, as during the Cold War, an instrument of preparation for a generalized conflict, making it possible to predict the plans of the Warsaw Pact and participating in the search for a military balance. It then tended to evaluate as precisely as possible the military, economic and political potential of the opposing military alliance. In peripheral conflicts he sought to determine the extent of Soviet involvement as well as the role of local actors. It is now a preferred instrument for preventing and managing crises or conflicts of varying intensities, and more than ever a means of supporting political decision-making in such situations. Aiming to establish our strategic autonomy, it will be oriented primarily towards forecasting and assessing conflicts.
Intelligence is an essential function of France's defense strategy. It is essential for the implementation and credibility of nuclear deterrence, for an objective and autonomous assessment of situations of interest to defense, for the positioning of forces to prevent or manage crises, and for their engagement in the event of conflict .
1.1. THE


79 the strategic level, which concems govemmental decisions; the operational level, corresponding to a theater of operations; the tactical level, which directly concems the forces engaged on the ground.
Traditional areas are seeing their importance decrease in favor of new regions: in Europe to counter the risks of regional conflicts, in the Mediterranean basin, in the Near and Middle East, etc.
It includes three parts:
A series of risk and destabilization factors emanating from various actors, state or not, has replaced the direct threat exerted by a single State, opening up a wider field for investigations. Thus the fight against the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction involves the extension of research to numerous countries which are either the source, the intermediaries, or the beneficiaries of technological dissemination . The same reasoning applies to transfers of conventional arms or trafficking linked to serious crime (weapons, drugs). we must constantly anticipate, maintain the initiative on the political and military level. b) The priority centers of intelligence interest must be reassessed, following on from actions undertaken in recent years. d) At the same time, the time factor is decisive in crisis management, where In addition to geographical and functional redeployments, there are changes in the nature of research. c) The geography of intelligence has become unstable. The dispersion and unpredictability of crises require incessant redeployments. The flexibility and adaptability of the system therefore play an essential role.
The technical characteristics of the resources assigned to intelligence and tactics must allow them to be integrated into multinational systems, primarily European and e) The collection, fusion and exploitation of data require an effort of organization, management and training of people, to make the information in a timely manner available to those responsible at each of the three levels mentioned above, Instruments


80 Beyond the measures already taken such as the reorganization of military intelligence or the rise in power of the DGSE, the emphasis must be placed on continued technical and material investment and on an increased effort in human investment. A long-term policy is essential to obtain significant results .
But the quite considerable increase in the number of data collected, due to the future development of technical sensors and human resources, as well as the importance assumed by the time factor, make it absolutely necessary to quickly put in place means highly automated intelligence fusion.
It is just as essential to strengthen human investment, both military and civilian. This involves increasing the volume of personnel in order to place the services at the level of those of our allies, and even more so improving the training and qualification of these personnel.
Thus, military intelligence sees its functions broadening to include surveillance intelligence (application of disarmament and arms control agreements) and alert intelligence (crises, proliferations). support the development of space assets with the family of satellites as well as associated electronic systems continue the effort already undertaken to modemize and develop intelligence organizations.
Finally, an instrument of sovereignty in our defense strategy, intelligence benefits from sharing and cooperation. services in European structures is not a realistic prospect in the period considered. However, it is appropriate to develop already effective cooperation such as the joint construction and operation of space, air, maritime and terrestrial equipment in the fields of observation and transmissions, and tomorrow electromagnetic interceptions .
Regarding investment, the guidelines
are as follows: renovate the electronic warfare means of the three levels and material, the large The recent creation of the Directorate of Military Intelligence helps to facilitate the implementation of such a policy. optical observation initiate radar observation satellite programs and


81 The set of command capabilities covers three aspects: command, communication and control. It constitutes the permanent nervous system of the forces, from the central level to the units deployed in the crisis zone.
To meet these requirements, a joint headquarters (EMIA) was created, capable of contributing to the various required planning and participating, when the time comes, in setting up the necessary joint commands.
Ultimately, it will be a question of having a projectable joint theater command, bringing together the elements that could serve as the core of a staff for the conduct of operations of which a coalition would have entrusted us with command. This multinational headquarters, intended primarily to strengthen the specific capabilities of European defense, should be capable, once established, of combining the action of land forces of a volume greater than that of an army corps. , of
1.2. The commandment The command capabilities required for the implementation of the main directions of our defense strategy differ depending on whether they concem the permanent security posture or the force employment hypotheses for which remote projection would be necessary.
The missions, articulation, volume and nature of the armed forces as well as the organization of command will then be different each time and adapted to the particular conditions of engagement. It will therefore be necessary to be able to set up, upon request, commands adapted to the circumstances whose cohesion and effectiveness must be guaranteed and to foresee the case where France would be entrusted, with the assistance of command elements provided by different contributors. , command of certain operations.
Regarding the permanent security posture, the commands come under a strictly national chain and means. They ensure situation assessment , the implementation of nuclear deterrence, the land, maritime and air defense of the territory, the prepositioning and reinforcement of forces at sea and overseas .
Regarding the projection of forces, since the national territory is not concemed, any military engagement will take place within a multinational framework (or bilateral for the application of defense agreements). The desire to ensure France's full place in coalitions where it would make a significant contribution calls, in addition to traditional capabilities, for new means of command and conduct of operations. Interoperability, mobility and modularity will be essential characteristics.


82 In the vast majority of cases, it will be necessary to act far from our borders. term is subject to circumstances. to ensure the security of the national territory and its forces with the nature of the crisis or conflict.
For this purpose, the corresponding means of transmission, simulation, command assistance and environment will be available in sufficient numbers .
In addition to their specific operational capabilities, examined elsewhere, the aptitude of the forces for distant intervention will depend on their availability, their organization and the nature of the means to be implemented in the theater of operations.
Examination of the different hypotheses for the employment of our forces shows that they are among those whose priority vocation will remain. in all of them intervene remotely, with compatible power and within deadlines and mobility carrier groups, and several squadrons of combat aircraft, as well as support associated with these forces. then becomes a determining factor of success. It depends on two factors: the aptitude of the forces for distant intervention and the existence of sufficient transport capacity.
Immediate availability only concems, in fact, a reduced number of units intended to provide the first level of rapid intervention, the other levels being able to be set up gradually, depending on the evolution of the situation. Generally speaking, waming notices and ramp-up times will be proportional to the severity of the crisis.
1.3. There Mobility The organization of forces must allow them to be divided into elementary cells, capable of being regrouped on demand, into coherent units, having all the command, action, support and support capabilities necessary for the intervention. The principle of modularity will be the condition for the effectiveness of any organization.
For the defense of Europe, in the event of major aggression, according to a threat hypothesis corresponding to scenario 6 presented in the previous chapter, the land, naval and air elements that we would have decided to engage as well as the corresponding command bodies will have to find their place within the allied system planned from peacetime, in application of provisions jointly decreed, the execution and implementation of which would be approved, in due time, by the govemment, within the framework of the Article 5 of the Washington Treaty.


83 Finally, the means implemented by the intervention forces must now be designed with a view to distant engagements requiring transport by air, sea or land.
These constraints, integrated into the technical specifications of the equipment, will most often lead to a compromise between speed, power and volume of intervention, at least for the forces engaged at the first echelon . of immediate transport which makes extensive use of the air route - can only rely on national military means, instantly usable whatever the circumstances. This observation makes it necessary to increase the fleet of tanker aircraft, modemize the current transport fleet and acquire heavy assets with a long range, preferably within a European framework. Likewise, the increase in the number of TCD type vessels (transport of landing craft) and that of tank carriers must be considered.
The delivery of heavy resources and the maintenance of logistical flows cannot, however, be entrusted to military means alone. The assistance of civilian resources will therefore most often be essential when the crisis exceeds a certain level of intensity or becomes established over time. It is therefore necessary to complete and improve the already existing legal system which makes it possible to make civilian transport capacities available to armies when the need arises. The law on maritime transport of national interest constitutes, in this regard, an example to follow and develop, particularly in the field of air transport.
The purpose of power projection itself is to stop the escalation of a conflict, to immediately impose the mark of superiority, without taking the risk of a long conventional war. The range of actions covers the immediate intervention of combat aircraft, missiles, first-echelon land forces up to the subsequent dispatch of reinforcements including heavy assets.
The permanent security posture may vary depending on the alert level chosen, which itself depends on the intemational and national situation. The evolution of this can lead to a reinforcement of the means which are normally allocated to the permanent posture, by drawing on the force groups.
The permanent security posture covers all the measures taken to protect the country in all circumstances from aggression, even limited, against its territory and its immediate interests. Around deterrence, it includes prevention, protection and force-building and format change capabilities.
There
2 - THE PERMANENT SAFE POSTURE


to assign it, in the face of an adversary threatening our vital interests, objectives adapted to a final waming.
Deterrence is based on the dual capacity, in all circumstances, to inflict unacceptable damage and to deliver a final waming.
Prevention today has strategic value. Its main purpose is to anticipate and prevent the emergence of situations likely to become conflictual.
This deterrent capacity must be part of total autonomy of national action. It requires having secure means of command and transmission, using particularly reliable modes of circulation and data processing .
The submarine component of nuclear forces is best suited to a second strike; it is also necessary to have weapons meeting the following specifications:
The modes of action are firstly political: consolidating democracies, reducing economic and sociological imbalances, maintaining strategic balances through alliances, fighting against the proliferation of armaments, etc.
They are also military intelligence, fight against proliferation, control of the execution of treaties, technical cooperation and assistance to friendly armies, prepositioning of land, air or maritime forces. Our forces must be able to apply them permanently: and to reinforce them, in the event of a deterioration of a situation.
The security of nuclear forces and their environment requires land, sea and air resources, which also contribute to the overall protection of the national territory. with regard to second strike capabilities and the vulnerabilities specific to each weapon system, particularly with regard to defenses likely to oppose their penetration Deterrence possess technical characteristics, range, precision, .
Prevention 84


85 As part of cooperation, technical or operational assistance detachments are also placed with friendly countries. They are at the heart of sensitive military systems and can act upstream, try to defuse the beginnings of a crisis, and provide effective information. Special operations contribute to this action.
Protection ultimately have means of detection and alert in the face of ballistic threats The protection of the national territory constitutes a permanent objective. It conditions both the safety of nuclear forces and the credibility of extemal actions, by protecting the territory from responses and blackmail of all kinds. The analysis of strategic perspectives and force employment scenarios has shown its importance. develop means of surveillance and protection against nuclear, biological and chemical threats.
The permanent system constituted by the prepositioned and presence forces can be supplemented, depending on the circumstances, by preventive deployments of forces at sea. The whole represents around ten thousand men, one to two squadrons of aircraft combat, transport and maritime patrol aircraft, and around twenty buildings. These forces rely on overseas establishments and on reception bases, in application of defense agreements. These also contribute to supporting the forces sent to reinforce them to prevent the worsening of a crisis or to deal with it.
These capabilities are provided by means of land defense, maritime defense, air defense, etc., i.e. approximately 50,000 men in peacetime for the three armies in mainland France and overseas. control air and sea approaches as well as borders
Protection mainly aims to: terrestrial, thanks to detection and intervention means;


86 The reappearance of a major threat against Westem Europe, targeting our vital interests, as mentioned in the scenario in the previous chapter, would require progressively adapting defense capabilities as it is confirmed, and building up the means necessary, or even to modify the format of our forces.
Regarding equipment, the ability to change format will depend on the state of the industrial tool at the time of the decision and will likely require off-the-shelf purchases. In this perspective, the costs of keeping production tools dormant and maintaining staff training capabilities must be taken into consideration. The consequences of off-the-shelf purchases must be carefully evaluated in terms of compatibility with other equipment already in service, maintenance in condition and overall consistency.
It is very difficult to assess needs today, but the process and Conceming personnel, the time required to set up and train new staff capable of being mobilized will be much less than that of restarting the industrial production system. They nevertheless require that conscription be maintained and that there be slight supervision in normal times.
Furthermore, the protection of the population is ensured mainly by the police and civil security forces and by the national gendarmerie, as part of its general security and public service missions. If necessary, the armed forces provide assistance to the civil authorities according to regulatory procedures.
In addition to the measures common to the three armies, particularly conceming personnel, there would be provisions specific to each of them, such as in the area of command for the army, logistical functions and certain infrastructures for the army. air, capabilities to be reconstituted for the navy (for example underwater warfare, mine warfare).
Formation of forces, change of format The implementation of this program would above all imply having sufficient implementation time, compatible with awareness of the threat, and of adjustable duration depending on the armies and the type of equipment considered.
Essential precautionary measures must be defined and prepared.


87
3 PROJECTABLE FORCES Logistics capacity also includes environmental resources. These bring together all the civil-military functions that must be assumed in an extemal theater, in particular media management, a now fundamental factor, and liaison with host countries.
General characters This logistical capacity is entrusted to specialized personnel whose availability must be the same as that of the forces to be supported.
All major and lasting commitments will require high-level implementation.
This covers all areas of equipment and personnel support: more particularly and as a priority, the Health Service, as well as the supply of petroleum products and ammunition, maintenance and repair services. In this regard, it is essential that standardization of most equipment is achieved and, at a minimum, that their interoperability is ensured.
The set of joint capabilities required for the logistics function in its broadest sense can represent approximately a quarter of the strength of the forces engaged, this percentage varying depending on geographical conditions, particularly climatic conditions, and the place occupied in the coalition .
Special forces are called upon to play an important role in most situations and in all phases of operations. Grouped under a joint command, they must see their resources and their numbers significantly increased, commensurate with the missions entrusted to them.
In each of these cases, reserve personnel will be increasingly called upon, particularly as experts, to assist in the reorganization and reconstruction of a country after conflict.
For each type of scenario, the diversity of modes of action and the search for maximum efficiency impose a composition and volume of forces as well as a different articulation each time. This implies that their structures are flexible and modular to be quickly adapted to situations and adversaries.


88 one to two brigades and one to two squadrons of combat aircraft for the same volume of forces, but with an aero-maritime component for possible intervention for the benefit of the French Overseas Territories The envisaged situations corresponding to scenarios S3, S4, S5 require limited military interventions: operations of a humanitarian nature, embargo control, control of land, air or maritime zones, one-off actions, etc. finally, specialized means from the three armies to participate in a blockade, in a
WEU, UN) . Limited crisis scenarios (S3, S4, The forces involved in this type of intervention must be able to achieve, on the ground,
the overall value: an air-transportable brigade and three squadrons of combat aircraft for intervention for the benefit of countries with which we have concluded defense agreements, or for certain one-off actions carried out within an intemational framework (NATO, In the event of simultaneity of the three scenarios, all the necessary means The specific value of these forces will reside, in addition to their availability, in their high qualification and the performance of their equipment: night and all-weather capability, electronic warfare, precise strike in depth, mobility in three dimensions, etc.
The projection means associated with them must lead to the deployment within a few hours of air reaction forces as well as the first intervention elements. It is necessary to plan for their replacement in order to keep the potential of the forces engaged intact.
These situations often require emergency intervention and therefore the deployment of immediately available forces. They are also characterized by the small scale of the initial clashes that the intervention must make it possible to contain or reduce . embargo or surveillance of a particular area. represents a global volume of the order: specific peacekeeping operations; one division or three brigades, for land forces


89 These situations, which correspond to scenarios and 2, can pit us against numerous and modem conventional forces, in combat that can reach high intensity, and force us, in certain cases, to protect our forces against the effects of weapons of destruction. massive. In this case, the intervention forces must benefit not only from a quantitative balance of forces, but above all from a clear qualitative superiority with regard to the means of neutralization and destruction. This superiority is largely based on technological advances. and around sixty medium tactical cargo ships for the air forces Mastery of the sky and the sea are the prerequisites for successful operations. The air and maritime forces must be able to control the spaces for which they are responsible, to obtain first for themselves and then for the land forces the necessary freedom of action. Electronic warfare means will have to make a major contribution to understanding and controlling these situations as well as limiting losses.
Land forces, to develop a large maneuvering capacity, will have to be equipped with flexible, mobile and easily transportable means. In this regard, the light armored division (DLB), with its protected armored assets and more numerous and more precise fire support (light aviation and artillery), represents a combined arms unit well suited to this type of action. In certain more restrictive situations for our forces, all or part of an armored division could reinforce these capabilities, knowing that its commitment requires longer delays and specific means of transport (tank carriers, special wagons). from three to six squadrons of combat aircraft, around ten tanker aircraft They will immediately be part of a joint unit. maritime forces.
These joint actions will take place in an intemational framework under European or allied command or operational control, in certain cases under command We must consider the simultaneous commitment, in the same theater, of a volume of law enforcement forces from two divisions with their support and supports, six squadrons of combat aircraft and a complete carrier group. Military superiority results on the one hand from the high qualification of personnel, on the other hand from the performance of the equipment, which will be gradually increased by the commissioning of systems capable of striking with precision at great distances, of means of alert and Regional conflict scenarios naval air assets including or not an aircraft carrier and several TCDs to
S2)


90 Reappearance of a major threat (scenario S6) The support structure brings together all the formations, functional chains and establishments which contribute to the preparation of forces, the training and training of personnel, the maintenance of equipment and the preparation of the future . administrations and services responsible for satisfying the individual and collective needs essential to everyday life and operations.
This scenario is covered by nuclear deterrence. The time required for the crisis to mature and therefore the waming notices would be very long, probably of the order of several years. It is in this context that the capacity for constitution of forces and change of format mentioned above is justified. This situation would require both a change of posture on the national territory, in particular the nuclear posture, and a change of format, then to prepare the forces for the threat of confrontation, in an inter-allied framework. It would also include the reconstitution of certain means.
This system, which represents, overall, 20 to 25% of the workforce, has already been, throughout the last decade, restructured and tightened, at the cost of a sustained effort to improve productivity . This effort will be continued.
The outbreak of a major conflict in Europe would immediately involve bringing all of our conventional forces into play, as part of the nuclear deterrence exercise. a set of schools, simulation and instruction centers, playing fields
4 THE GENERAL ENVIRONMENT surveillance of the combat zone, action capabilities in the rear and in depth, night vision and all-weather combat capabilities, etc.
To the capabilities of a strictly operational nature, it is appropriate to add all those which, without directly contributing to the achievement of the missions entrusted to the forces, participate in their preparation and execution. . maneuver which ensures the training and operational preparation of units The means of support include in particular:


The overall format of the armies results from taking into account the defined capabilities but sufficient to allow the necessary increase in power when the time comes, the army must continue and accentuate the development of its ability the need to have fire resources allowing support as close as possible to the units the strengthening of support resources, particularly in the area
5.1. The national gendarmerie, whose main vocation remains the accomplishment of missions relating to the permanent security posture and public service and civil defense missions, must be able to meet its peacetime obligations with a workforce of 95 the projectable forces, on which the effort must be immediately focused, the permanent security posture, which must be maintained at a minimum level
5.2. For the Army, several directions of effort result from the transformations of the strategic context and the importance that the hypotheses of regional conflict in and outside
Europe now have:
Taking into account the nature of the needs for light and heavy means, as well as the general environment, on which an effort to reduce and rationalize must be continued. manpower required in combat and support units, forces It is possible, on this basis, to define the objectives of each army for the period of fifteen years to come. several priorities are also highlighted: the provision of means adapted to the sustainable and permanent control of physical and human environments, in complex environments, taking into account protection in all its forms and using high technology, in particular precision ;
91 forces to 100,000 men.
for three areas: heavy than in the past of health. has
5 OVERALL FORMAT OF ARMED FORCES


92 The army's projected capacity will have to represent 120,000 to 130,000 men. From this reservoir of forces, two to three divisions must be able to be permanently projected, with a combination of heavy and light means, adapted each time to the circumstances.
5.3. The navy's effort will be focused on crisis prevention and force projection, while the contribution to the permanent security posture around the Strategic Oceanic Force must be maintained at a sufficient level .
The naval forces will have to include around a hundred vessels, including the naval air capacity itself and a submarine component, with 65 to 70 high seas vessels including around fifty combat vessels, flotillas of maritime patrol aircraft and helicopters .
These 120,000 to 130,000 men, representing eight to nine divisions with their support, also support units and organizations intended for territorial protection, training and general and territorial support. better level of projection means and anti-submarine warfare means essential in particular to the security of the FOST as well as qualitative developments in combat vessels, particularly in the field of anti-aircraft defense and electronic warfare.
Maintaining a mine warfare capability must also be ensured.
The emphasis will be placed on specific military transport buildings, alongside civilian means, surveillance and control of large areas, means of supplying combat ships, and logistical support. The naval aviation capability must, as much as possible, be permanent.
5.4. Apart from air coverage of the territory and nuclear capacity, which must be permanently ensured from the national territory, the Air Force will have to develop its strategic mobility capacity to conduct Overall, the missions assigned to the navy involve maintaining The sea control and power projection missions will be carried out by the carrier group and the nuclear attack submarines. They involve a range of capacities that ensure autonomy, coherence and duration of action.


the control of large areas, located at a great distance from the mainland, must be ensured, with tactical combat aircraft and the AWACS fleet constituting the heart of surveillance and combat resources, in-flight permanence and long-term intervention capabilities distance will have to be increased, which notably involves significantly increasing the fleet of tankers the transport capacity for the benefit of the three armies must be renewed and significantly increased, in particular to ensure the establishment of the first echelons of forces, which cannot be dependent on civilian means (long-range transport, military cargo planes tactics). actions from the mainland or from extemal support points. The new characteristics of these
missions lead to the following changes: terrestrial the need to control collateral effects leads to the development, alongside massive bombing means, of precision weapons, for actions carried out in depth but also to support and contact forces These formats constitute general objectives over the period. They must make it possible to ensure the missions of the armed forces as previously stated. The choice of resource ceilings will depend on the Govemment's definition of the degrees and intensity of possible commitments of our forces, in view of the evolution of the strategic context. action in depth must be possible at all times, with reduced losses, that is to say by combining the systematic use of offensive and defensive electronic warfare means and weapons fired from a safe distance;
In total, the air forces will have to represent the value of around twenty combat squadrons, including a reservoir of twelve squadrons allowing, permanently, the projection and relief of six to nine of them, to which it is appropriate to add the means of air defense of the territory and the nuclear squadrons. In addition, around twenty tanker aircraft and around a hundred tactical and logistical transport aircraft will ensure the required projection, mobility and support capabilities.
93




Chapter 6: Human resources For a long time an element of geographical, social and cultural cohesion, national service also remains the method of recruitment most suited to the framework and context of France's strategy, objectives and defense policy, as well as to the means that we can devote to it. It results in the choice of a mixed system, bringing together professionals and conscripts.
The choices mentioned in the previous chapters are based on a triple dimension of the effort that the Nation devotes to its defense: human, material, financial.
This choice of a mixed army, like the changes in the intemational strategic context which underlie it and the global economic prospects which accompany it, calls for an ambitious human resources policy. This must strive to reconcile the interests of and individuals, and be adapted to each category of personnel: conscripts, reservists, career or contract soldiers, defense personnel. These men and women, civilian and military, find their identity and cohesion in the way they fulfill their mission on a daily basis. In a period where concems are sometimes acute, it is important to ensure them living, working and retraining conditions worthy of their place in the Nation and their social function.
The duty that citizens have to serve their country, the choice and training of the men who will bear arms, the status that the Nation grants and the interest it has in defense personnel are the major components of what It is agreed today to call on the human resources of Defense: it is their support, it is their qualities, it is their capacity to serve which gives the defense apparatus its meaning and establishes its future.
The new strategic concept, which is based on both deterrence and action, leads us to question, through the question of national service, the active participation of citizens in these two components.
THE RESOURCES
Part 3 94


of law, human rights, democracy.
1-THE CHOICE OF A MIXED ARMY Armies must have the personnel and material resources necessary to fulfill the missions assigned to them. These means include all the forces likely to intervene extemally, their support structures, as well as all the means assigned to the permanent security posture. Conscription is the solution best suited to the format chosen for the armies, to the missions they must assume, and to the resources that the nation intends to devote to them.
National service remains the best guarantee of the attachment of the nation and citizens to their defense. It thus reinforces the credibility of the deterrence exercised by nuclear forces which also depends on the determination that the French show to preserve their existence. It reinforces the legitimacy of the extemal actions that France undertakes, in the name of respect for Conscription, through the potential it holds, is and will be able to provide the human resources which will make possible the format of armies enabling it to face , with all of these means, the risks of the future.
Finally, everyone is fully aware of the role that military service played in the creation of national identity and in the defense of Faced with the difficulties inherent in both the urban polarization of French space and attacks on social cohesion and if such a situation cannot justify, in itself, the maintenance of national service, it already contributes to the fight against exclusion. It must remain a crucible of integration, a school of civics, a model of belonging to France.
1.1. National service: a necessary framework.
Likewise, conscription plays an important role in the defense of the territory in which the entire population is thus directly associated. The participation of military units, made up of conscripts, in civil defense, and in particular in public service missions, such as the protection of populations and property, reinforces this feeling of osmosis.
This must be associated with an increased professionalization of the armies and a true universality of national service.
Conscription is also a means of providing reserves, notably with a sufficient number of specialists. In doing so, conscription also authorizes one of the essential conditions for a possible constitution of forces and a change of format.


96 An army composed almost exclusively of conscripts or reservists and a very limited proportion of professional executives (the so-called Swiss model) would not meet the current and future defense needs of France. Well suited to territorial defense and intervention in the context of a major threat in Europe, it does not have the flexibility of use required for crisis management, if only because of its low capacity immediate projection.
National service must be preserved. But the French army must however see its recruitment methods evolve, in order to have more units For the army alone, a format of 230,000 men allows, under current conditions, to allocate approximately 130,000 men to operational formations, if we take into account extemal interministerial participation, etc.), unavailable personnel, support and administrative staff. This amount is just enough to meet the missions, taking into account the necessary relief and the multiplication of our commitments. It would therefore be necessary, in the event of generalized professionalization, to take charge of a significant volume of employees, which would result in a very high cost.
A gradual increase in the rate of professionalization, through commitment and the development of long-term volunteering options, is therefore essential in the years to come. It must lead to the establishment of immediate availability forces. It will, moreover, allow us to better assess our real recruitment capacities. to intervene, today requires sufficient volumes. These, flexible in use, allow an immediate reaction in all theaters .
The mixed army: a suitable solution The professional army would not make it possible to respond to all of the missions already mentioned, unless we imagine budgetary expenditures and a flow of commitments which seem unreasonable, even out of reach.
In addition to this budgetary difficulty, the professional army poses a real recruitment difficulty. It implies a doubling, or even tripling, for the army, of recruitment flows for enlisted personnel. The current share of career staff or under .
The resolution of extemal crises, in which France can be made more professional.
1.3. The constraints of the professional army


mentioned above.
97
1.4. National service: equality and universality In addition to the recruitment of enlisted personnel, the choice of a professional army presupposes that of a large number of civilians to replace the conscripts. It therefore requires a strong increase in land resources to the detriment of land use and investment costs. The payroll, excluding social charges, of a hierarchical sample of 1,000 people is thus 195 in the United States and 273 in Great Britain compared to a base of 100 in France. Also a transition to the professional army in our country, with comparable numbers, would involve upsetting the balance between operating and investment expenses of the defense budget, with inevitable consequences on the defense industry. defense.
Whatever the hypothesis considered, the conditions of execution and the consequences of the transition to the professional army do not appear realistic. Such an orientation would also deprive us of the beneficial aspects of national service, already mentioned. contract is in fact only 43% in the army (62% for the air force, 71% for the navy, 86% for the gendarmerie). However, out of 20,000 annual recruits, half subscribe to their commitment when they are incorporated into the national service, which therefore appears to be a source of recruitment that is difficult to replace. Furthermore, recruitment for the 100,000 non-military jobs occupied by specialist and often high-level conscripts becomes uncertain, unless resorting to the employment of civilians, which would increase the But this format, while it would allow, by concentrating the personnel in question on the operational forces, to respond to the envisaged missions, would require entrusting all other missions to civilian personnel. This new configuration is obviously a profound break with the entire history and ways of life and functioning of the army, to mention only this Thus, a professional army compatible in the years to come with the missions of our armies would have an excessive budgetary cost and would pose delicate recruitment problems. Adapt these last two. elements to our budgetary and human possibilities would no longer make it possible to carry out the missions.
Maintaining national service requires that as many people as possible continue to do it. To be accepted, this duty must indeed remain universal. The exemption from service for young girls does not appear to be an attack on this principle and compulsory national service for women has never seemed necessary. High rates of dispensation and exemption would, on the other hand, render obsolete the very condition of The hypothesis of a significantly smaller size for the army, of 160 to 180,000 men, would probably be compatible with recruitment possibilities.


98 On the one hand, the importance of human capital justifies a constant effort of prevention and care. Defense has long been concemed with the prevention of workplace accidents and occupational illnesses, particularly due to the risks specific to military activities. This orientation must be continued with: prevention commission and hygiene committee, actions to determine awareness and training. The health service, a joint service, is invested to the needs of universality. We know that the multiplication of dispensations and exemptions has led some of our neighbors to eliminate the national service. In France, at present, almost a quarter of young people are exempt or exempt. This rate should no longer increase.
The universality of national service to preserve its equality. This is not formally imposed as imposing a length of service. The equivalence of ten months of military service, sixteen months of service in technical aid or cooperation and twenty months for conscientious objectors is accepted and even contributes to the search for equality among all. This equality implies that national service reduces social disparities. Generally speaking, it calls for a real enhancement of military service.
Although human resources cannot be predicted with absolute precision, projections show that age groups average 380,000 men until the first years of the 21st century. By applying the current dispensation and exemption rates to this volume, and reducing it by the annual flow of initial recruits, a useful resource emerges for the national service of approximately 280,000 men (a resource which does not take into account neither reformed nor early releases after incorporation).
The mixed army that France chooses thus brings together, in the service of Defense, very diverse men and women: conscripts, reservists, career or sub-contract soldiers, civilians. Before addressing their specificity, it is appropriate to highlight two aspects The annual incorporation of 250,000 conscripts for the needs of the armies, through 10-month service, allows the civilian forms of national service to employ 20,000 to 30,000 men today.
As several parliamentary and administrative reports have highlighted, this resource is not overabundant and appears to be in the future format of these resources. to all of this staff.


Promoting military service requires several specific objectives:
99 Military service is the reason for conscription. It gives it its legitimacy. To be accepted, it must not only be equal and universal, but also be truly effective: the Nation must derive the greatest benefit from it. More profoundly, it is the incamation and the true daily life of the very notion of service, the completed expression of national cohesion and the sense of duty towards . of a mission of prevention and care which extends to all civil and military personnel belonging to the Ministry of Defense, as well as to the families of military personnel and the various categories of rights holders. The missions of this service have diversified through humanitarian operations, and aid to developing countries, at the scene of natural disasters. This health service is essential to our defense, its functioning and its effectiveness. in France and especially to His mission of the forces in oneration must be These requirements of universality and equality, linked to a real human resources policy which is a guarantee of efficiency, call for an enhancement of military service. It constitutes one of the objectives of the military programming law.
A fairer and more efficient use of conscripts involves putting an end to the most shocking inequalities, particularly in the methods of selection and approval of several forms of service.
On the other hand, an original policy of narrative innovation has been implemented in the defense sector, in order to take advantage of the diversity and human richness of personnel. This orientation must be maintained and even extended, particularly within the general delegation for armaments (DGA), for technical innovations. It is indeed important, among the latter, to develop those which deserve to be generalized. improve the management of available resources, refocus the lives of conscripts towards military activities, rehabilitate the situation of conscripts and clearly give priority to those who serve in operational units, improve the training of conscripts, maintain the modalities of arranged execution, develop communication on military service.
The resource: better management
2 THE CALLED UP: HIGHLIGHTING MILITARY SERVICE


The conscript: rehabilitate his situation expanding access for conscripts to of its purpose: the service of arms. The conscript has a vocation as a fighter. of significantly to those of them serving in operational units. operational. operational. the appearance their service. expressed before incorporation qualifications held the adaptation of the nhvsiaue standard not to Several paths must contribute to this goal, to name only three:
Military service is all the better accepted by those concemed the closer it is to called such as their housing conditions. currently deemed unfit. . Military service: an essential densification Improvement efforts must extend to various areas of the lives of military, it is a question of increasing the bonuses and allowances attached to the activities in national service The improvement of the material conditions of conscripts will benefit as a priority and between civil and military forms of national service. Within the service itself It will be necessary, through sustained interministerial cooperation, to promote armies new needs giving in particular the opportunity to promote the service in to enable better use of qualification and experience) so as to facilitate the reintegration of conscripts at the end of their taking into account military service professionals (training providing earlier detection and management of Long Service Volunteering The promotion of military service thus involves instruction and training activities, which alone prepare for missions.
Finally, in terms of remuneration, the blatant disparities must stop exclude civilian forms of young volunteers with recognized skills but increased to


101 the possibility offered to everyone, since the 1983 law, to terminate their suspension at the period of their choice, although this provision results, in practice, in delaying the average age of incorporation a little more each year and makes delicate management, National service aims first and foremost to satisfy the needs of the armed forces. It therefore provides basic military training then, depending on the position held, provides additional military training or maintains and develops technical skills based on civilian training acquired prior to service. Young conscripts thus have the opportunity to develop professional skills thanks to the experience of supervision and service of new equipment. They leam to deal with unexpected situations and compare their skills with those of their classmates. In addition, the armies call on poorly qualified personnel for deficit specialties, to whom they provide by leaming the first basics of a real profession. . National service: informing the populations Surveys show it: the will to defend remains at a high level. More pronounced among men, and even more so among those who have completed their national service, this is a very positive effect of conscription. In its current form, with a duration of ten months, national service is not seriously called into question.
Over the years, provisions have been adopted to limit the disadvantages of performing national service for young conscripts. Because they make the duty that this service represents more acceptable, they will be maintained:
Military service: a training framework Military service: modified execution methods the rapprochement of home or family... in the best interests of the This system, deepened and developed by better coordination with the National and with the world of work, as is done at the end of military service with certain professional organizations, will begin first at the local level and its extension to the national level will be subject to examining the lessons that may have been leamed. defense and interested parties. the postponement of incorporation for the pursuit of higher studies,


An essential component of defense and the armed forces, just like the national service of which they are an extension, the reserves contribute to the will and spirit of defense of the Nation. The profound changes in our defense apparatus, linked to the evolution of the geostrategic context and the format of our armies, call for their renovation.
102 Information in this area must still develop based on the fundamental and permanent goals of the service: satisfying the needs of the armies, arousing and developing the spirit of defense, achieving the social mixing necessary for cohesion, a prelude for some to a real integration. Media actions can also contribute to changing the image of the soldier, such as reporting on operational activities. . Renovated reserves Yesterday, the reserves represented, within the framework of the general mobilization, the distant concept of the Nation in arms, like a final bulwark against a major aggression. Tomorrow, the increased role will be affirmed, from times of crisis, of a reduced reserve. real has In this context, it is now up to the armies and the gendarmerie to instruct and administer only the personnel corresponding to their possible needs, for a wider range of missions (natural disasters land defense intervention, armed or not, inside or outside the national territory). To this end, the armies and the gendarmerie will call on, as a priority, reservists from active military service whose date of incorporation dates back less than five years (available reserve), reserve officers and non-commissioned officers who have subscribed to a special engagement contract (selected reserve) and reservists holding a professional qualification necessary for the armies (specialized reserve): i.e. approximately 450,000 to 500,000 men, compared to the 3,000,000 previously managed. uartial.
The law of January 4, 1993 lays the foundations for an ambitious renovation of the reserves. It creates contractual volunteering and thus opens up more widely, to those who wish, the possibility of participating in the defense of the country from peacetime and more particularly in the context of crisis management. The duration of the activities of reserve officers and non-commissioned officers is extended, which allows them to be better trained and trained. available. better educated. granting priority to voluntary executives,
3 THE RESERVISTS: THE PROJECT OF RENEWAL


Future directions . The new concept of reserves marks a break with the past, which requires and awareness, in the direction The renovation of the reserves, the centerpiece of maintaining the spirit of defense, opens a vast, particularly innovative and demanding project, primarily in the areas of socio-professional integration, communication and resources. accompanied by information measures, for all relevant layers of society. . Better integration of the reservist into his socio-professional environment will be sought. It is currently difficult for a voluntary reservist to reconcile a temporary commitment to the armed forces with his professional life. How can we call on the reserves without causing them to suffer unacceptable salary losses? How can volunteers not be harmed in their right to retirement, since they no longer contribute to their old age insurance fund and are subject to a pension deduction from their pay without benefiting from a military pension? How can we fairly remunerate a head of clinic, a computer engineer or a lawyer willing to put his high-level skills at the service of defense for limited periods, without being able to devote the time necessary for promotion in the reserves?
It is necessary, simultaneously, to convince of the merits of the call for different categories of reservists, to promote the image of the selected or specialized volunteer among private and public employers, to reorient those who will not be integrated into the military reserves , and to encourage collective support both within the armies and in the environment of potential volunteers.
These new questions, linked to the creation of some 70,000 voluntary, selected or specialized reservists, require appropriate answers so as not to put those concemed in difficulty within their socio-professional environment.
In the long term, this profound renovation of the reserves will allow the authorities responsible for defense to have a reduced reserve that is more active, more reliable and closer to the forces. In times of peace or in the event of a crisis, volunteers from these reserves will be able to reinforce the units engaged. In the event of force buildup and format change, the selected reserve will provide support resources.
Consultation is necessary, on the one hand with the Ministry of Labor, in order to ensure consistency between the provisions of the labor code, in the relations between the reservist employee and his civilian employer on the other hand, with the employers, to raise awareness and explore possible solutions with them. This is one of the major conditions for the success of the renovation of the reserves.
103


104 The general framework of army action continues to evolve: crisis management today replaces, without excluding, armed confrontation; joint cooperation becomes the rule and action within multinational forces becomes widespread, technologies and a generation of new weapons systems appear, they create qualitative personnel requirements.
CAREER OR SUB-CONTRACT MILITARY This adaptation of means to ambitions will require a financial effort to be devoted, above all, to the remuneration of volunteer reserve executives during their periods of instruction and training, in order to encourage volunteers and maintain cohesion.
Finally, matching the means to the ambitions is necessary, as well as the effort and the equipment.
These changes weigh on the management of military personnel. In order to take them into account, successive reorganizations have been initiated since the White Paper of
1972. New developments are today necessary to establish the policy of career or subcontract military personnel. The primary condition for its success is the visibility that only the introduction of staff into the programming can ensure. Personnel policy, like that of weapons programs, needs to be designed and applied over time. Other developments are necessary in recruitment and training. careers and military condition.
The instruction and training of officers and non-commissioned officers of the selected and specialized reserve will be the subject of particular attention. Their training activities and operational training will be intensified, depending on the qualifications to be acquired, the positions held and the levels of responsibility.
The world of defense cannot, moreover, ignore the trends in French society: the affirmation of individualism, the stronger attachment than ever to the cost of life and therefore the hesitation to commit it, the increase in the level of training, the almost permanent pressure from the media but also the need for security, the real desire to know, the sense of self-giving and sharing.
Concentrating the choice on the directly usable resource requires rethinking the management and reception structures for reservists, to replace mass management with much more refined and personalized management. relate to management,


. Improve the level of recruitment In addition, the expansion of the missions of the armies, taking into account the prevention and treatment of crises, leads to new needs for experienced executives: establishment of observers from or from the CSCE, cooperation missions in foreign countries, liaison within intemational staffs, activities of intelligence organizations, tactical and strategic thinking, mastery of cutting-edge technologies.
To equip themselves with quality personnel capable of coping with management tasks as well as the technical requirements of the profession of arms, armies must improve their recruitment. This can only be done by increasing the share of extemal recruitment. The latter must in fact constitute a pool from which the armies will draw personnel capable of following, for officers, higher military education and, for noncommissioned officers, the most specialized training. This development must be accompanied by the necessary measures aimed at mitigating its effects on intemal motion.
The current staffing rate of our armies, mainly in the land army, still remains low. The more their format decreases, the more reduced armies must be structured to, if necessary, carry out a constitution of forces and a change of format. Intemational comparisons also show that our armies are less supervised than those with which they are required to work: the supervision rate in France is 40% excluding conscripted personnel, compared to 55% in the United States, Great Britain and 47 % in Germany (rate of executives 1992). It is in the army that under-management is most evident (31% excluding conscripted cadres and 34% with conscripted cadres).
4.1. Recruitment Supervision Training Increase the relative share of executives in The new framework of action for the armies requires a qualitative improvement in recruitment, a quantitative improvement in supervision and a greater opening of the army training system, the quality of which, otherwise recognized, must be preserved.
Past and present operations show that the management of forces must be at a quantitative level higher than the current standard. The increasing complexity of implementing modem weapons systems reinforces this need.
105


106 of the solution certainly involves the development of Personnel training plays a key role in the armies and justifies the effort undertaken in this area. Formally distinct from the instruction and training carried out in units and troops, it is delivered in schools or in specialized organizations. Its general objectives are clear: on the one hand, to stimulate resources and improve recruitment through the attraction of quality training, on the other hand, to enable real social promotion, and finally to satisfy the needs of the armies by adapting training initial and continued to hold jobs.
Joint forces.. Engaged in the process of training leaders, with the creation of the Joint Defense College which corresponds to the needs felt in the conduct of operations, it must continue at other levels to achieve better relative of executives in the armies is This training has the characteristic of being global since it addresses all aspects of the personality and plays an important part in moral training and the strengthening of character. The quality of individual and collective behavior depends on its quality, a guarantee of the essential cohesion of units in operation. It also aims to give everyone the essential capacity for adaptation and innovation and, in this area, the general culture which promotes open-mindedness will remain more than ever the school of Training is, finally and above all, specific since dedicated to the teaching of know-how and tactics of the military profession.
Generally speaking, armies are also not immune to the phenomenon of tertiarisation of jobs which has long since spread to civil society. The need for gray matter and the importance of general culture are even greater than in the past and this deficit in senior managers also affects defense civilians as much as the military. The diversification of recruitment therefore appears to be an interesting direction of research with the possibilities in particular for young university graduates, active reserve officers and finally personnel of all levels already trained and qualified outside the armed forces. . necessary today, even if the urgency of its implementation varies depending on the personnel and categories of personnel.
While preserving the reputation for quality of this training, it should be adapted to new needs linked to the evolution of the army's framework of action, the emergence of new techniques and the need for frequent retraining. .
In total, These adaptations must not, however, allow combat know-how to wither, the acquisition of which remains fundamental.
Continue and adapt the training effort Permanent improvement of technical knowledge is essential today.


4.2. The career of military Opening up to foreign armies is another area to prioritize, particularly in Europe. A useful complement to the cooperation undertaken in terms of armaments, it is often desired by our partners.
The needs of armies for personnel are increasing in quality and diversifying.
However, selection rates are not really improving despite a difficult economic situation and a surplus job market.
The career of military personnel has very specific characteristics Equally interesting prospects result from a more systematic opening towards the civil sector. The strengthening of links with the national education system, already practiced occasionally, should make it possible to recruit more qualified personnel and to use training organizations outside the armed forces. We can expect better promotion of professional achievements, new opportunities for young people and an improvement in recruitment dynamics . and recognized by statutes. Often without equivalent in the public service, these are the counterpart of the military specificity which it is necessary to reaffirm due to the very nature of the profession of arms and the particular and often severe conditions of its exercise.
Therefore, the question of the attractiveness of military careers could arise.
The measures to be taken relate to organization (creation of teaching centers), management control (better knowledge and better control of costs) and the definition of training objectives (stricter job-training match) .
Adaptations, reinforcing the orientations already undertaken, are necessary in order to make the statutes more flexible, to preserve for the military the right to a second career and to retraining; they will be supplemented by developments specific to each category of personnel . synergy of the training systems of the armies, without the identity and specific training needs of each of the armed forces being, however, neglected or denied. . Confirm and sometimes relax the statuses 107


The general architecture of career plans organized by the texts of 1972 Corresponding to a need of the armed forces, short careers must be fully accepted, whatever the categories of personnel concemed. Unlike other agents, most military personnel leave active service well before the age of normal interruption of all professional activity. This characteristic is a necessity for the operation of military units. Normal for non-commissioned officers and some non-commissioned officers, the logic of a short career also applies to certain sub-contract officers.
Finally, greater flexibility in the statuses is sometimes necessary in order to favor certain recruitments which are currently difficult to achieve in specific skills and techniques.
Confirming the right of military personnel to a second career and therefore to retraining is essential to promote quality applications and conditions, to a large extent, the career developments, cohesion and moral solidity of the institution.
Without excluding intermediate careers in certain cases, a broad distinction between short careers and careers must be sought.
It is the balance of the system which deserves particular attention today. It was based on a strong trend of departures before the age limit. However, the slowdown in this phenomenon, undoubtedly attributable to the economic situation, risks causing a deterioration in progress and therefore motivating adjustments. a second career is increasingly difficult, so aid for retraining is a new challenge for the armies. The aid package must be based on a solid legal basis and support the distinction between short and long careers. The search for equivalences in the field of training in conjunction with national education, training facilities for example, the granting of scholarships for active reserve officers and the introduction of retraining projects in careers are more and more necessary. reconversion and 1975, as part of an overall attachment to the civil service confirmed by the transposition to military personnel of the provisions of the protocol does not call for fundamental reform today. Its objectives, if they are generally achieved, must be consolidated: rejuvenation of management, improvement of their training and hence their level of qualification, greater selectivity in terms of recruitment and advancement.
Such an objective requires incentive and support measures. Access . Confirm the right of soldiers to a second career and therefore to a 108


109 In terms of management, the principle of dominant career and monitoring by specialties more grouped into job families must find, over time, their place in each army and at the joint level. This decompartmentalization, carried out without a systematic approach, will allow a more rational use of all of the ministry's human resources. terminal grades. THE purpose of placing future army leaders in situations earlier is to enable them to acquire a global vision of the terminal functions envisaged for them and to cultivate the leadership qualities necessary for a military leader. It must be admitted, at the same time, that not everyone can reach the top of the ladder and therefore that some are offered, in compensation, assignments outside an institution commensurate with the training acquired.
The provisions of Law 70-2, which allow retraining in another administration, could be extended and adapted in order to create real continuity, in the public service, between military and civilians. Such a development would constitute a better use of the human resources of Satisfying the needs for experts requires that organizations be organized to devote priority to the exercise of and the selection of future Managing end-of-career and final grades is a problem that arises today for all senior management in the public service.
Developments to continue for each category of personnel Long careers, following a progressive selection of personnel, must, for their part, be integrated into a pyramid of grades which ensures, whatever the duration, material satisfaction and appropriate professional and personal development.
The career prospects for officers must be maintained at their current volume and if possible improved, the narrowness of these prospects posing an inconsiderate risk on an organization which, like the others, needs an elite. officers : the adaptations to be made concem more particularly the career paths comparable to those Finally, it is necessary to address here the specific question of military retirement pensions with immediate benefit; neither in their basis, deferred remuneration, nor in terms of the age of their beneficiary, these pensions are reducible to an old age benefit like the others nor comparable to a common law pension.


110
4.3. The military condition Non-commissioned officers. The recent developments aimed at improving to reduce any significant discrepancy with the modes of commandment. This orientation involves establishing a better compromise between stability and mobility.
Non-commissioned military personnel. Their recruitment, at a qualitative level meeting the needs of the armies, requires attractive contracts likely to attract applications in sufficient numbers. But due to the brevity of their career, generally around ten years depending on their level of qualification, the dominant problem will be that of their retraining.
Successful action in this area can only have a positive impact on recruitment.
The recruitment of young personnel, a guarantee of greater efficiency, the notion of a contract rather than a career, the requirement for mobility and availability, develop the feeling of Also the constraints of the military profession will continue to be reduced or compensated for the life of civil society.
Ultimately, it is a question of encouraging choices between short careers, of the order of ten years, and long and complete careers, thirty years and beyond. The aim is to give those concemed a clear vision of their future, to better satisfy the needs of the armed forces, to make the training provided profitable and to facilitate the retraining of military personnel. The effort to benefit short careers is particularly necessary here: severance pay, assistance with retraining in continuity with the action undertaken in initial training. For noncommissioned officers, the question of a second career will therefore arise in different terms.
Military personnel, like other social categories, see the evolution of their material situation as a tangible sign of their relative place in society. However, at a level of recruitment equivalent to that of civilian personnel, very specific constraints weigh on the military profession. The soldier must prepare to carry out, in conditions that are difficult to predict, an activity by nature marked by the death of the adversary , of a comrade, of oneself. differentiating the length of careers must be continued.


The army most often requires a complete and exclusive commitment from its members and the imperatives of the military profession spill over into family life to the point that the condition of the soldier and the condition of the families are closely linked. These imperatives and the resulting consequences in terms of availability and geographic mobility
mean that:
The military is also required to do so. only the narrative situations and the risks of the mission.
Nothing should be imposed on the military, particularly regarding their right of expression, which would distinguish them from civil servants without recognized necessity. If necessary, adaptations should be sought.
Only about a third of military spouses (according to available estimates, between
30 and 40%) carry out paid work, whereas, for French society as a whole, this rate is 67%.
The solutions adopted for the and consultation of the military illustrate this principle.
They do not constitute a degraded mode of the rules from which other citizens benefit in their professional context, but demonstrate the possibility of finding original paths while respecting the requirements of military life. The request for the establishment of legal assistance in professional life also corresponds to a need, increasingly expressed and fueled by the desire of those concemed, to take into account the specific nature of the function and military responsibilities . guarantee.
Establish the specific rights and obligations of the soldier A harmonization of legal solutions may also prove necessary in the future to take into account European construction without renouncing our own military culture. The development of interoperability will not be limited to strict tactical and technical aspects. It will involve the organization of a set of legal, administrative and financial rules, applicable to institutions and individuals to enable the functioning and operational engagement of multinational forces. Ultimately, even if questions of harmonization and intemational coordination initially only reach the highest levels of the hierarchy, the establishment of an intemational status for the military could emerge at the center of discussions .
Improving the social condition of soldiers It is appropriate, first of all, to limit the effects of the cantonment 111


112 the volume of transfers with change of residence is of the order of 40,000 per year (in 1992) for a total workforce of 300,000. For officers, this results, on average, in a transfer every 4 or 5 years Finally, the military represents an important and valuable means of helping families resolve the often difficult problem of sending children to school.
Compensating for the consequences of geographic mobility Compensating for these constraints justifies the maintenance or even improvement of specific measures, in particular those relating to social policy which must remain an essential component of the condition of military personnel. This element is decisive for the cohesion of the military community.
THE In the field of housing, great progress has been made in rental matters; it is now a question of reducing the obstacles which arise from geographical mobility in terms of access to ownership of what will be the main residence. The policy of reception accommodation in all garrisons will be continued as will the particular effort made in the Paris region and aimed at reducing the Contributing to the achievement of army missions: civilian personnel play an important role in the organization and operation of defense. For these civilian personnel, the imperative to adapt to the new environment of the armed forces is also fundamental.
As part of the restructuring undertaken, an effort has been made for two years. It includes measures to assist with departure and mobility, as well as the professional presence time of the military, subject to the strictest constraints, is significantly higher than the average working hours of other categories In addition, a response will be sought to the request for housing assistance for the benefit of children of military personnel, who are pursuing higher education.
5 CIVILIAN DEFENSE PERSONNEL Mobility is the essential source of constraints weighing on the soldier and his family. In order to avoid too great a gap with the lifestyles of civil society, transfers with changes of residence must be reduced to a minimum. This action can only be completed after the current period of restructuring of the armies and the stabilization of their format. driven by an assignment in Ile-de-France.


For workers, a significant effort to simplify classifications, the nomenclature of professions and management methods is essential in order to develop professionalism, to better recognize the importance of training and qualification, and to promote mobility. professional and, therefore, geographical mobility. professionals and to foster a ministry. civil and military.
Towards a simplification of statutes and regulations The condition of civilian defense personnel This overall development should enable the departments and services of the Ministry of Defense to implement, for the industrial part of their activities, practices and uses closer to those of industry.
The main mission of civilian defense personnel is to participate in the design and production of equipment, as well as in the support and maintenance of forces. It thus holds a very important place in the organization and functioning of defense services and contributes effectively to the achievement of the missions of the This personnel falls under a wide variety of statuses and a multiplicity of regulations which call for a significant effort of simplification and consistency for all categories.
The promotion of professional careers is necessary. It involves various orientations: strengthening the mobility of civilian personnel; its participation, on a voluntary basis and within a statutory and regulatory framework to be defined, in operational activities to support the forces engaged; the increase in the share of positions of responsibility: increased training. In the same spirit. it seems desirable, for the sake of unity and cohesion, to seek out all opportunities for joint training for personnel, or even whenever possible, with their military counterparts. as training and retraining (270 other directions must be pursued.
For civil servants, it is desirable to group together certain bodies of the same level of and Furthermore, for activities of a specific nature, a system intended to secure the services of high-level civilians for a specific period must be maintained.
In total, these orientations should make it possible to diversify the overall paths of human resources for the functioning of the armies.
In 1994). This effort, supplemented by 113


for civil servants and contract workers. For workers armies. His legal condition is, however, no different from that of other citizens, subject to certain restrictions imposed on a limited number of agents, due to the nature of their functions. Its social condition is that of public agents; it follows, in broad terms and according to the rules specific to them, the developments in social policy in the public service.
They are, in general, increasingly linked to the vast effort to restructure the defense apparatus currently underway.
This results, for the civilian personnel affected by this development, in an increased requirement for mobility, both professional and geographical, of an exceptional level and pace that has been unusual until now. These restructurings call for the continuation of support measures, particularly in the area of social action.
Human capital remains a main asset of defense. Place personnel policy in a long-term vision, make an effort, with the corresponding means, on the quality of people, their recruitment and training, in particular through greater openness, reaffirm the right to a second career and take into account the concem for retraining, better balance the constraints imposed on the military and in particular mobility, ensure real human support, encourage prevention and participatory innovation, these are the main axes of the policy human resources, for the mixed army that France must equip itself with.
In this general framework, constraints weigh on civilian defense personnel and the maintenance of existing ones. These constraints may be due to the accomplishment of army missions affecting the working conditions of civilian personnel, in terms of working hours or on-call duty.
114




115 Arms policy is an essential element of defense policy. It ensures the provisioning of the armed forces. It is therefore one of the instruments of the is furthermore to These changes must still be accomplished in accordance with the higher objectives of the Nation and be treated as an investment for the future. Without continuity in this effort, the missions of our forces cannot be ensured in full and our defense industry will have to disappear, as will probably the European defense industry of which it constitutes a major element.
But profound restructuring of the industrial tool is The armaments policy is also part of the industrial policy of its competitiveness is fundamental.
This is a vital necessity to enable armies to have the quality and quantity necessary for their equipment according to the financial resources available. Competitiveness is also a source of effectiveness of our export policy which in tum produces beneficial effects on the costs bome by our forces for the acquisition of their equipment.
The Ministry of Defense, responsible for arms policy and At Having the tools and technological capabilities that our forces require, in conditions compatible with the nature of the effort that the nation intends to devote to its defense, requires vigilance today and tomorrow.
Chapter 7: Arms policy and industrial strategy national level, as well as at European level. A review of plans, based on changes in threats and risks, technological choices and financial trade-offs. on the supervision of the corresponding industrial sector, must lead the necessary developments: sovereignty of the nation.


and the arms industries, the increasing complexity of technologies, the constantly increasing cost of design organizations and testing facilities, by renovating the relationships maintained the extension of the duration of programs, the insufficiency of the national market, the appearance of new intemational competitors.
116
1 DEFENSE AND INDUSTRIAL AND TECHNOLOGICAL CHOICES Defense-related industries occupy an important place in the French economy:
2% of market GDP, 5% of industrial employment, 7% of total industrial production, 5% of exports. The Defense sector covers a significant number of complex skills in the design, manufacturing and testing of systems that France has developed over the years and programs. This network of skills is unique in Europe: in certain sectors, France occupies advanced positions (guide missiles and missile penetration assistance, inertial navigation, certain optronic missiles, energy materials, etc.) . by carrying out genuine strategic thinking in industrial technology and defense research, to better prepare for the future, by combining a policy of controlling arms flows with an export policy which will preserve our country's autonomy and responsibility on the world stage.
From 1960 to 1985, this industry was present in all equipment niches. Such a situation is no longer possible today, it will be even less possible in the future due to
the combination of several factors: taking into account, as an imperative and an opportunity, the new European challenges,


117 Necessary technological and industrial choices information and communications, nuclear ballistic missile submarines and to make alone if The productivity efforts undertaken are equipped with nuclear warheads, the military effects of the weapons and their capacity to and the France must remain fully competent for everything relating to sufficient funding from the community. Sharing is a concept that requires at least Do alone, share or abandon? Doing it alone is an ambition that combines manufacturing and implementation of systems. These technological sectors and these choices This concems the techniques which contribute to the autonomy of decision and permanent tool on this Already, several orientations must guide the but must keep the necessary, indispensable. They will not be enough. The time has come to determine the Strategic analysis of defense technologies requires ongoing effort penetration of opposing defenses, launch systems, systems of the For other strategic sectors; France can alone all of these the membership of a partner. Giving up supposes either the disappearance of the need, or nuclear power and its environment This includes in particular strategic missiles desire to maintain a high level of training and research and the assurance of strategic strategies in fact closely participate in national sovereignty and are command of forces (sensitive technologies necessary for intelligence These changes in the geopolitical and economic environment confirm has strategy to be undertaken with regard to the different sectors of the arms industry. of the Ministry of Defense. The analysis already undertaken should make it possible to constitute a In the nuclear field, our country must master the design, essential to the implementation of the priority objectives assigned to Defense. their acoustic discretion, underwater detection capacity. the assurance of finding the same quality elsewhere and sustainably, within the required deadlines and neither nor indeed necessary. aue France for an acceptable price. technological and industrial choices that must be made in the defense sector: that it is and maintains


118 To exist, Europe needs autonomous industrial capacities. None of the main weapons systems necessary for the defense of its common interests, of the industries in question must ultimately, within the framework of objectives must be able to develop weapons performance. the civil sector. Defense research thus contributes to maintaining and defense electronics and materials. Materials are the basis of efficiency however underestimate the importance for the Nation of the direct or tasks, to ensure the ability to export products produced jointly and to information), techniques that provide an operational advantage of the more important civilians. The scale of the effort devoted to research and cross-disciplinary areas condition the design, implementation and intelligence in these industrial choices. Among the industries With regard to this orientation, aerospace and defense electronics are the with other navs such as transport and combat aircraft, ground combat vehicles, and technologies set out at this level is not development, in industry and in laboratories, of good skills indirect technologies of cutting-edge technologies which contribute to the development of activities in major mobile, electronic warfare), those which make it possible to define and defense systems. Defense electronics are fundamental for the previously, there is no area other than common and following procedures to be defined, to be European. These procedures must make it possible to protect against the loss or maintenance of what would be abandoned by France, to ensure an equitable sharing of development is justified by the military utility of the goals pursued. We can not defense systems and must be prioritized in European cooperation: hardening of communications security of collection systems and exploitation of two sectors which cause the strongest civilian benefits. They represent Outside of warships and satellite systems. Among the various skills, two Duality. military and civil, also being put into armament necessary for the defense of France, some have fallout effect produce complex weapon systems. moreover each about a third of the overall arms activity. have the results of all research work. scientific and technical.


The evolution of technologies, the extension of the duration of programs from the feasibility phases to the time of equipment withdrawal from service, the control of defense budgets make it necessary to constantly ensure the maintenance of industrial capacity to produce, when the time comes, the high-performance weapons systems that our forces will need.
These different orientations, combined with each other, must allow technological and industrial choices to be made in the future to determine what production, skills and technologies France must maintain in its own right, seek to develop in cooperation or acquire on the world market. . Preparing for the future requires that these directions be served by a proactive technological policy.
Finally, in certain other areas, we can note on the contrary that defense is no longer the engine of innovation or has only a marginal impact on the market while the spin-offs of civilian research in the military field are often become very important: thus telecommunications and computing (with the exception of the capacity to resist electronic warfare), but also electronic components and materials, some of which can however be specific and critical for systems of defense. These skills are accessible globally from several sources. In these areas, we must find advantage in a wide opening of the markets.
Maintaining the study and development skills of defense industries, and therefore their long-term independence, requires an ambitious policy of exploratory developments often carried out with our European partners, a policy which must not prejudge decisions to launch programs. These projects, whose costs must also be evaluated and controlled, can more easily prepare for future synergies and alliances than the programs themselves, which are more delicate and take longer to implement.
Guide defense research by taking into account both technological possibilities and future operational needs, define technological plans and multi-annual research programs, optimize material and human resources within the framework of a skills policy, promote innovation and organize the A technological policy preparing for the future.
119


120 transfer of research to applications, achieving, whenever possible, osmosis between civil and military research, promoting intemational and primarily European cooperation, these are the objectives of an ambitious scientific and technical policy .
This policy also implies that European states demonstrate their solidarity through a European preference. France must convince its partners of the need for a common strategy, otherwise the decline of the European arms industry will begin and the independence of Europe will be undermined. industry an imnerative and a Political cooperation has already opened the way to economic cooperation at a time when it became an economic necessity. First wanted by States, then accepted and sought after by industrialists, cooperation on programs has led to increasingly better constructed and lasting industrial agreements. The main companies are therefore already on the path to concentration on a European scale. The movement deserves to be encouraged, particularly through the role played as a shareholder of public companies. By joining forces, European partners will be able to compete on a global level and will develop their competitiveness.
The creation of a defense Europe is no future conventional weapons seem to be possible in the long term of cooperation. The cost of non-cooperation proves to be prohibitive due to the price of developments, the cost of testing resources, series effects, the tightening or accessibility of export markets. Only criteria of strict national independence will then be able, in very limited sectors , to justify assuming such a cost.
2 THE EUROPEAN DIMENSION chance. Europe will take a long time to build and its geometry may evolve over time. Without delay, States and industrialists must commit to a series of concrete and proactive actions intended to prolong the initial results obtained. cause.


Consultation between the various staffs and official services concemed must be strengthened as early as possible, so as to obtain the best compromise on operational specifications and to limit national specificities as much as possible. This must be the case, for example, for the project which appears fundamental both for operational needs and on an industrial level, of the European tactical transport aircraft. increasingly intemational groups, it is important that States coordinate their efforts more. This is why the organization of cooperation going as far as the pooling of means of negotiation, evaluation and testing is essential.
A real industrial project manager will be systematically sought in order to clearly establish responsibilities. In agreement with the official services, it will resort to competition for the subsystems by favoring European offers through reasoned choices on their specifications. The partners will then have to Interest and necessity lead us to engage simultaneously, with different European states, in cooperation on programs and in industrial alliances. Alongside industrial concentrations giving rise to Simple and effective rules must be proposed today to boost the process of cooperation on arms programs, in order to benefit from it in terms of development, industrialization, production and support costs .
The number of major partners in a program must be limited and subsequent partners must accept the conditions of the initiators in order to avoid subsequent challenges. The operating and management rules will be adapted to the real weight of each partner.
Cooperation on programs Companies must also take an interest in this process by proposing the technical and industrial adjustments necessary to keep these programs within acceptable financial envelopes.
Integration into the Independent European Program Group and the European Armaments Agency provided for by the Treaty on European Union constitute possible frameworks for this policy.
121


122 In Europe, the national series of equipment are too short, the program by program application of the law of fair retum in cooperation is generally uneconomic, companies do not reach critical size, research remains scattered and energies are scattered. Restructuring of the European arms industry has therefore become essential in order to face intemational competition, particularly American competition.
Even if we must seek to avoid monopoly situations, the objective of any restructuring strategy should be to achieve, at European level, the creation of world-class companies in each sector .
It is desirable, when possible, that these groupings, carried out by profession, are backed by large multi-sector, industrial and financial centers, because of the resulting advantages: increased financial surface giving greater weight in strategic negotiations, more extensive commercial networks, pool of technologies, diversifications, less overall sensitivity to fluctuations in a sector's activities.
Industrial alliances refrain from calling into question, for the production phase, the distribution of tasks carried out during development.
Companies are primarily responsible for these alliances. These must nevertheless be encouraged and supported by States because they pose new problems: national safety rules to be broadened, export regulations and policies to be coordinated, financing of upstream research to be coordinated, questions relating to shareholding, financing of new programs, community regulations, etc. These restructurings and dominant positions must now be judged on a global market scale.
These operations must be part of regional development and employment area reconversion policies ; consequently, inclusion in the Community aid system must be sought.
Finally, the acquisition of equipment already in production in other European countries will be considered very broadly, within the framework of a market where reciprocity must be the rule.


123 The missile domain represents a fundamental element of coherence of all weapon systems. The restructuring of this sector is almost complete in the United States. Two major European centers are to be formed. Together, they will represent more than three-quarters of the European industry's missile tumover. Further developments could further increase its industrial efficiency.
In the field of In the years to come, mergers in certain major centers will be carried out:
In the field of aircraft, the European fabric is fragmented on an industrial level and on a program level. The survival of a European industry requires mutual support between civil and military activities within the same groups, especially as delays increase between programs.
Faced with the increasing complexity of systems and the technological challenges they represent, capabilities in terms of simulation. testing and trials must be developed. These resources, which represent a significant part of the cost of developing programs, are no longer within the reach of a single country. The provision or sharing of existing resources, consultation before any new major investment envisaged by partners, the creation of European testing and research centers are among the first directions to be undertaken.
The political objective of standardizing the state's water supplies would constitute an encouragement and a basis for this process. it appears that a European approach is becoming essential. For France, such a perspective will undoubtedly require first carrying out a structural adaptation of the activities of the shipbuilding department, in order to enable it to play its national and intemational role under acceptable conditions .
The restructuring of the land weapons sector is essential. if he was The satellite sector, despite the formation of alliances, remains very fragmented. The creation of one or two major European centers should be considered. Here again, civil space and military space are concemed. The urgency remains to redefine a real European space policy.


124 with Great Britain, a European country with which we have already carried out important programs and whose research and development effort and industrial potential are most comparable to ours, all possible convergences must be explored .
For political, economic and defense reasons, the entire European continent is concemed by the evolution of the industrial potential of armaments, cooperation, programs and industrial alliances.
Only national customer, these relationships, while preserving the broader actions which will lead to the establishment of the European Agency for with Germany, to which we have a long history of cooperation, illustrated today by major programs in the field of helicopters and missiles, the establishment of a structure intended to rationalize bilateral cooperation in the field of armaments should give a new dimension to Links with different European states very generally finances research, development, industrialization and the main means of testing which are necessary for the implementation of major programs and which are essential for the All the nations of Westem Europe must be associated with the European approach by finding industrial niches for each of the future partners where their skills can be exercised.
With Italy and Sweden, countries which have significant industrial potential, our industrial relations must be developed. The same goes for Spain and the Netherlands. But it is of course with our two partners whose size and challenges are comparable to ours that cooperation efforts should be carried out as a priority:
3. RENOVATED RELATIONS BETWEEN THE STATE AND INDUSTRY While it is necessary to carefully identify the technical and industrial areas of cooperation with the countries of the former Soviet Union, permanent collaborations can only be intensified when the intemal and extemal stabilization of these countries has progressed sufficiently.
ARMAMENT


the armament will be able to see their structures evolve. exports, encourages cooperation. of the companies in question. companies concemed. acquisition.
125 A State with refocused and predictable action European and global landscape and ensure optimal management of public credits, effects that they had on the evolution of defense budgets require a revision of the social transformations call for a spirit of partnership between and painful can only increase with time. However, the consequences The new conditions of the European and intemational environment and the control the acquisition costs of weapon systems and diversify the modes criterion, the industrial activities carried out within the General Delegation for industrialist for reasons of national independence. Depending, among other things, on this to eliminate excess capacity. Nothing should delay this adaptation whose character The role of bom great strategic and industrial mobility. It will allow them to form alliances The opening of the capital of certain public companies will give them more discussion framework for state and industrial actors. by supporting its arms industry in all areas. to better prepare the French arms industry for the modification of the come. For many years, and still today for constructions prior, however, will have had to carry out the industrial and financial adaptation bringing synergies. It will constitute an element of European construction. At as in the defense sector will have to evolve in the years to the competitiveness of the latter, prepare them for European restructuring, must today, for reasons of competitiveness, encourage companies relations between and the arms industries must be redefined to improve mastery of technologies; he also ensures compliance with safety rules, controls the this domain will be restricted, even if it may retain a vocation to play a role naval, carried out direct industrial activities. In the future, its action in


Also, to enable it to acquire the military equipment that it has retained as part of its defense policy and to win the battle for export competitiveness, it is essential to reduce the cost of arms.
The new conditions of the European and intemational environment and their The evolution of technologies between two generations of weapon systems induces cost increases which become unbearable in the current environment.
Control programs and reduce costs of weapon systems In this context, greater attention must be paid to the fabric of companies often called second level (SME-SMI). These companies are the source of innovations essential to defense; they are also the origin of equipment and components necessary for the overall coherence of our weapons systems. Their weakening would cause that of our defense industry as a whole and, ultimately, could call into question our independence. Particular attention should be paid to the balanced nature of relations between project managers and subcontractors and the initiative should be taken to take appropriate measures. Armaments SMEs-PM1 can bring to the formation of groups or alliances the technological and economic assets which will strengthen their position at the global level.
The cost of extemal factors generally cannot be attributed to weapons materials, but the consequences must be correctly identified.
This is why programming laws must distinctly determine armament programs and provide guidelines for maintaining industry skills in sectors considered strategic.
This requires analyzing the intemal (industrial and state) and extemal factors that have determined them until now, then putting in place procedures and structures to get as close as possible to competitive conditions. Considerations foreign to industrial logic alone are in fact imposed on the arms sector. consequences in budgetary terms thus impose a review of the role of the latter will have to make choices regarding its interventions. It must also strive to guarantee its partners the predictability and security of its commitments, which are at least as important to them as the level of our defense effort.
126


127 The arms acquisition process, based on the sequence expression of need, drafting of specifications, execution of the contract, involves operational managers, official services and manufacturers. It takes place in an iterative manner around program management methods which aim to fulfill the role of an often non-existent market, avoiding an overly inflationary spiral.
Military characteristics must avoid excessive improvement and remain stable over time. To this end, various complementary actions The imperative of national sovereignty or the requirements of industrial policy have led to very severely limiting purchases abroad in the past and to excluding significant sections of the arms industry from the competitive sector. Territorial planning constraints also often pose an obstacle to restructuring of industrial facilities, to the detriment of optimizing overall capacities and therefore costs.
Each of the three actors is the source of part of the program costs either directly (military characteristics, manufacturing) or indirectly (choice of methods, competitive bidding, tests and technical expertise, approval and control procedures).
A real revolution of minds must take place today to renovate our methods of defining the need, producing, acquiring and marketing weapons systems. It goes through
different evolutions:
Integrated teams on programs should be encouraged, in liaison with manufacturers, especially in the first years of a program where decisions incur the majority of costs. This attitude is of particular importance in cooperative programs where the harmonization of operational needs must no longer result in their accumulation, which risks leading to uneconomical or even unrealistic programs.
So when we try to take into account the above factors by isolating the fair price of weapons equipment from the extemal costs supported by the Defense budget, we arrive at the conclusion that, on the amounts spent annually for acquisition, several billions relate to the financing of these constraints. We must seek to better understand this amount and measure the influence of these factors.
Control of intemal factors must be vigorously pursued.


This analysis must be carried out either on complete equipment or on elements or subassemblies. A distribution of weapons equipment into three categories is desirable, the decision to buy abroad or have it manufactured in France then being taken with
full knowledge of the facts:
The industrial price control method must be an incentive for once a certain experience has been acquired, faster access to
Category 3: The most common equipment (generally those available on the market without significant modification; for example transport vehicles, harbor tugs, light training aircraft, etc.). Recourse to the DGA would remain possible but the search for the minimum cost using the various Comparison with prices charged on the intemational market must be sought whenever possible and constitute an essential criterion of choice.
Diversify acquisition methods must be undertaken (value analysis, reduction in the duration of developments, research into the lump sum nature of contracts, etc.
2: Complex weapon systems and equipment whose definition, both in terms of needs and specifications, is delicate. As part of the current renovated acquisition procedures, European and even intemational consultation must become systematic.
The procedures for awarding and executing public contracts must be revised to take into account the specificities of weapons equipment and European openness.
Category 1: Major weapon systems for which no intemational global price reference exists, even if all elements of comparison will be systematically sought.
These are the weapons of supremacy (nuclear weapons, strategic missiles, nuclear submarines, etc.) requiring the maintenance in France, or sometimes in European cooperation, of skills and production capacities. Current acquisition procedures will be subject to the renovations just mentioned. allow real cost and to encourage the manufacturer to reduce its costs, and therefore prices.
128


129 Resulting from the conjunction of our independent foreign policy and the search for national autonomy, France's arms export activity has placed our country, in the past two decades, in third place in the world among equipment suppliers. defense. with around 10% of the market, approximately on par with Great Britain and far behind the United States and the USSR, which shared approximately equally 70% of the world market.
This policy assumes reciprocity of trade, within the framework of a clear European preference.
France thus exported around 35% of its conventional arms production. The corresponding amount represents around 5% of French exports over the period considered, and more than 15% of exports of capital goods. It amounts to a practically net positive balance for our trade balance, our imports of defense equipment being limited.
Overall, the choices between off-the-shelf purchase, national program and cooperative program will now have to be made based on exhaustive and rigorous analyzes of the operational, industrial, political and economic advantages and disadvantages of each solution. This in any industrial relationship between a supplier and its customers.
These figures incompletely account for the benefits the nation gained from exports. Indeed, constituting the main source of self-financing for national industry and guaranteeing the maintenance of technical and industrial skills, exports have enabled us to make the requirements of our policy of independence in the field of armaments compatible with the limitations linked to the size of our country and our armed forces, and to the share of budgetary resources that the nation could devote to its defense equipment. Export has also been an instrument of foreign policy and France's presence in the world.
Acquisition procedures will be given priority, with the definition of appropriate qualification and monitoring procedures. cost must be at the heart of these choices as Buying existing French or foreign equipment off the shelf is often a good short-term solution for the most traditional equipment, taking into account that any adjustment to the specifications results in a serious increase in costs.
4. AN EXPORT POLICY.


strengthened and its first adaptations to the European Union initiated.
CIEEMG: Interministerial Commission Exports of War Material like most of their counterparts, our armies must be more involved in arms export operations, upstream of contracts and during their execution However, the pursuit of an export policy is necessary, while respecting a policy of controlling arms flows. without renouncing the idea that commercial and contractual responsibility belongs to manufacturers, it is appropriate to be able to resort where necessary to State framework agreements, or to similar solutions. This development corresponds in fact to that of demand, to which our competitors gain access.
Exports have become more difficult today, in a situation marked by the multiplicity of risks of instability, reductions linked to arms control and disarmament agreements, the drop in defense budgets in certain areas of the globe, which make fierce competition between companies.
Our export policy must see its support system In a climate of ever-increasing competition, we must strengthen the effectiveness of our arms export system through a series of coordinated actions:
France will maintain its export efforts, commensurate with the economic needs that motivate it, and also the political objectives that it pursues. It will do so in strict compliance with non-proliferation regimes and in the spirit of intemational initiatives of moderation and transparency with which we support. To do this, the national export control procedure at interministerial level is appropriate. It must be maintained in principle, even if it is subject to adjustments, as well as the principle of decision-making on the basis of the case-by-case examination of export requests. . A reinforced export support system
4.1. The importance of exporting.
130


exporters must receive, when necessary, govemment and political support at the level of that enjoyed by our main competitors. The prerequisite for this action is good information and good interministerial coordination, used in conjunction with the manufacturers concemed. armaments based on European preference, exnorted out of as a necessity. However, the problem of the and the unification of national regulations for the control of consultation between the States involved in cooperation. In this respect, the establishment of structures with a high level of consultation, or even joint controls, for the export of the main materials could be considered. the approach which is increasingly imposed on our exporters as an obligation, is to structure the communication between the arms manufacturers, traditionally isolated, and the other actors of economic activity must first be more fluid moreover, for large contracts, compensation programs could be guaranteed and managed by the French administration The intemationalization of the arms industry also calls for intensifying In the absence of a rapid emergence of a large European intemal market for financial system must also be improved, our guaranteed credit system, within the limits set by respect for our national financial balances, must be effective and adapted It is necessary to seek quickly, in a pragmatic manner and by prioritizing dialogue with our main European partners, following on from the arrangements that we have been able to find in the past with the FRG and Great Britain, the conditions under which the authorization of The export to third countries of products resulting from industrial cooperation between our arms industries may be granted.
Export and the European Union exortations, and in the longer term that of the harmonization of national positions with regard to arms exports.
131


4.2. Control of arms flows . Future developments A harmonized European arms export policy, with its apparatus and control procedures, is a short-term objective, linked to the deepening of the Common Foreign and Security Policy.
At the intemational level, several frameworks have been developed in recent years including: the consultation exercise between the five permanent members of the Security Council, begun in 1991 the register of conventional arms set up within the work of the CSCE the harmonization efforts which preceded the Treaty on European Union.
Thanks to a complete administrative and legal system, the permanent interministerial approach and the rules of conduct established between public authorities and defense manufacturers, the export control system aims for efficiency and rigor.
1. Intemational transparency systems will develop. The foreseeable evolution of the register of conventional weapons of the UN should lead to an increasingly exhaustive inventory of arms flows thanks to the extension of its geographical area and the refinement of the system.
The purpose of arms export control is to reconcile the political and economic objectives of our arms sales with the duty to maintain, promote or restore peace. In this sense, France's export policy is guided by principles of moderation and sufficiency. The criteria linked to maintaining regional balances at low armament levels are taken into account in its decisions.
In the years to come, new factors will modify the conditions for exercising this control and undoubtedly its scope. They will be political, economic and technical.
Already, to the notion of control are added those of transparency, restraint and control of flows which go beyond the national framework.
132


133
4. Mastery of cutting-edge technologies constitutes a strategic asset. Its research results in the cross-border circulation of quasi-immaterial media and of scientists and technicians. Current regimes are not capable of these flows which contribute to proliferation in all areas of armaments. could prove to be held. The interference between the technologies implemented, the multiplicity and opacity of sources of supply for the reconstitution of weapons, make it more difficult to control the final use of the exported elements, Positions of France with regard to these developments subscribes to intemational transparency efforts in the field of armaments and adheres to the principles of restraint which are now expressed in multilateral forums. She actively participates in the actions carried out in this will not be The distinction between conventional weapons and weapons of mass destruction on ie framework of intemational forums.
The European Union will be interested in arms exports and sensitive transfers. A list of European criteria conceming transfers of conventional arms was adopted in June 1991. When the European Treaty was adopted, export control was mentioned among the
3. Industrial control of products likely to control national export only. A growing share of these products will come either from cooperative programs, from multinational companies, from foreign subsidiaries of French companies, or finally from subcontracting outside the development of a general method for dealing with responsibility for the question of intemational arms transfers will take a long time, but it vectors.
France sees the arms export policy as an element of territory. areas likely to be the subject of joint action. of a process essential to stability in the world. The policy is based on the following
principles:


European construction can hardly wait. Entire sectors of activity are in question. The necessary efforts must be part of a global policy which will also include exports and active participation in the control of arms flows and transfers of goods and technologies.
The field of the arms industry is undoubtedly one of those where the Within the European framework, the harmonization of control policies and procedures has begun.
It constitutes an aspect of the Common European and Security Policy and will be justified all the more as the volume of materials produced in European cooperation increases.
Preparing for the future requires that the areas of excellence and sovereignty be identified very precisely, because it will neither be able to support all activities nor maintain its current industrial role.
A policy of intemational arms transfers necessarily involves export control at the level of each State. States that do not have such a system must be helped to put it in place: encouragement and support for the development of appropriate administrative structures, development of appropriate national laws with specific controls, promotion of exchanges of information between national organizations responsible for implementing control policies, developing codes of good conduct in sensitive regions.
134


135 . The defense effort of the major industrialized countries
Chapter 8: The defense effort
1.1. Evolution and defense efforts of France and The United States, through the effort accomplished during the 1980s, has accumulated an incomparable technological advantage and superiority. As a result, in recent years they have reduced their defense effort from GDP to GDP, by reducing the size of their armies. However, this remains considerable. In addition, the emphasis is more than ever on the quality of the material. It appears that even at % of its GDP and with a budget of 250 billion current dollars in 1995, the United States will remain the first and only world military superpower, especially since its forces are equipped in all areas with the most advanced equipment. more modem. Their savings mainly result from base closures and workforce reductions.
The effort that France devotes to its defense results first and foremost from the political choices of the nation. Its scale is commensurate with the challenge: permanently ensuring the survival, independence and rank of the country. Its definition depends as much on the objectives defined in the military, technological, industrial or intemational fields, as on the inevitable budgetary constraints. It also takes into account its importance for the economy in general and the particular role of the industrial arms sector. his For the next fifteen years, while allowing us to meet the ambitions of our defense policy, the defense effort must be part of a rehabilitated programming method, informed by long-term planning work.
The analysis of the defense efforts of France's partners highlights the particularities specific to each country, and allows us to situate ours while highlighting its specificities.
1 THE LEVEL OF DEFENSE EFFORT


reduced its defense effort to Great Britain devotes % of its GDP to its It is the country whose situation is closest to that of France because it has a nuclear force, a navy and an air force similar to ours, at least in terms of numbers. On the other hand, the entire army is half as numerous as ours, and the British budget does not support either the gendarmerie or state industrial establishments. Among comparable powers, the British defense effort is the one closest to ours: apart from nuclear and space, Great Britain is able to equip its forces with national equipment . The counterpart of a Royal Navy and a Royal Air Force at respectable levels is a strict limitation on the strength of the Army. Like Germany, Great Britain uses civilian personnel in much greater proportions than France (50% more). (approximately 30%) applied almost equally to the three armies and to civilian personnel.
Japan, by maintaining a defense effort at around 1% of its GDP, in reality provides its defense with a budget of the same order of magnitude as France, Germany or Great Britain. But this budget is entirely devoted to the creation and modemization of classic self-defense forces, the level of equipment of which could give this country, in around ten years, one of the most powerful classic military forces in the world . world.
Germany, with 48 billion deutschmarks (or 163 billion francs) of GDP. Of course, a comparison with France is difficult because it concems different realities. Thus, Germany has no nuclear expenditures and its Navy is not comparable to ours. It is forced to reduce the size of its armies (West and East combined) by the provisions of the 4 + 2 Treaty. Furthermore, like that of the United States, its defense budget does not include the gendarmerie.
The German budget is mainly devoted to the Land and Air Forces. In the budgetary conditions imposed on them, German officials believe they cannot maintain armies of 370,000 men with a level of modem equipment: the questioning of the EFA aircraft program is an example of this. It seems very likely that Germany will, in the long term, take its efforts to a new level.
136


137 Measuring everyone's overall financial effort by the ratio of all defense spending, including pensions, to domestic product is the least bad answer. This is the standard adopted by and imposed at the intemational level. It offers the advantage of homogeneous series over time and between countries, which no other reference can establish.
Beyond the political, economic or social upheavals which may have marked this period, it is the continuity of an effort by the entire nation for its defense which is essential. With great regularity over time, this effort places us, in relative terms, far behind the United States, slightly below Brittany and ahead of Germany (graph attached).
France's defense effort The question of a synthetic indicator of the defense effort, of its relevance for intemational comparisons, has been raised for a long time. It is complicated by the differences inherent in the histories of each country, in particular the complex relationships between the arms industry and the economy in each of them.
The defense of the nation requires, by the nature of the equipment involved, by the length of productive cycles, by the investment in the training of the men who ensure it and the scale of the financial means involved, a continuous and regular effort. The 1972 White Paper already underlined that we must be clearly aware that a dangerous impasse in defense resources can only be corrected slowly and may be irreparable.
These reasons explain that, since 1962, our defense effort in terms of equipment has followed the evolution of GDP, with remarkable continuity, which does not contradict the sometimes more rapid changes in periods of increase in power, in the nuclear field. notably, sometimes less rapid. Over thirty years, the defense effort has strictly followed the economic evolution of the country measured by the progression of the gross domestic product, as shown in the attached graph.
The scale, challenges and specific characteristics of the defense effort imply a long-term policy and global, military and economic coherence. of defense to the Gross Domestic Product (merchant). All industrialized countries use the GDP reference. The same rule is retained here, the rates of evolution by and in GDP being analogous: the attached graphs illustrate these evolutions which integrate, in relation to as for all NATO statistics, pensions.
France has so far reported its


138 . Army: suppression of 4 of the 13 organic divisions, two army corps structures, the Pluton nuclear regiments and 21 territorial headquarters These various reductions Comparisons with the defense effort of our neighbors are useful to situate that of our country. Three characteristics stand out:
Germany 84 and the United States
In 1977, the Gendarmerie and pensions included, the share of defense spending was % of GDP. This rate then increased until 1982 to reach 3.98 of GDP. Since then it has continued to decrease, reaching today 3.38% of GDP. This movement affected all armies, which lost 40,000 jobs in 1991 and 1992, and more particularly the army:
You should know that a variation of plus or minus 0.1% of GDP corresponds, for the defense effort, to around 7 billion per year, or, over a period of ten years, to a difference of plus or minus 70 billion of francs, that is to say the equivalent of certain major programs. defense. On a base of 100 in 1990, France is, in 1993, at the Great Britain national index were passed on of varied with regard to the spending of the Atlantic Alliance. All Member States now provide 28% of this expenditure, whereas they were responsible for 36% in 1985. . Navy: reduction in equipment programs for 2 new generation SSBNs, 2 nuclear attack submarines and several smaller vessels . since 1989, all our partners have, more than us, reduced their effort by France is the only military power of comparable level which devotes more than 50% of its budget to investments (52% in 1993). France's original situation is obviously linked to the choice of the policy of nuclear deterrence (25% of investments) and to an industrial policy of sovereignty. If our country has been able to devote such a large share to investments, it is largely due to the choice of a mixed army model. . Air Force: increase from 450 combat aircraft to 390


139 The level of resources devoted to defense must match the norm The last decade has in fact been characterized, in the field of army equipment, by the rise of exploratory studies and developments, the fruit of the efforts of our research, public and private. These have been and still are largely financed by what is one of our singularities compared to our allies. The share of studies and developments then represented more than 30% of annual defense investment. the distribution of this reduction in the defense effort between expenditure politics and the requirements of its security. It is determined by its desire for independence and the concem to guarantee its strategic autonomy, within the framework of the progressive affirmation of the European project in terms of defense. It involves participating in the military balance in Europe and having a capacity for action on the intemational scene that meets the principles set out previously.
It is up to the next programming laws to organize over time the establishment of the capabilities attached to these missions and the gradual evolution towards a new model of armies. This transition, which accompanies the transition to a new strategic era, requires a specific effort on the part of France between now and the end of the century. of equipment and operation, and within the latter, varies depending on the State.
It appears that in terms of operating expenses, France has restricted those relating to personnel more than its partners. They all favored a very significant reduction in equipment expenditure. This is the case for the member countries of and in particular for Great Britain. This is especially the case for Germany, where the decline in equipment spending is so pronounced (-40%) that it should be reversed in a few years to provide for the replacement of old equipment currently in use. Finally, the United States also reduced its equipment spending but at the same time decided to moderate the impact of these reductions on its industry by granting reconversion credits. They also seem to have taken measures to ensure the sustainability of their modemization capacity and the safeguarding of their skills in order to guarantee their superiority in almost all areas.
1.2. France's upcoming defense effort


It also involves difficult choices. In an industry whose decision cycle sometimes lasts ten years and the manufacturing cycle as long, reorientations are laborious and changes painful, when they are deemed possible strategically, economically, socially. Furthermore, the stopping of construction sites and the renunciation of manufacturing, if they are the sanction of a determined political choice, are all the less easy as they cancel out the fruits of the often heavy investment effort which preceded.
The strategic change into which we have entered therefore has an inevitable cost, since it is a question in particular of ensuring the permanence of nuclear deterrence, respect for the new priorities of intelligence capabilities, command, mobility, as well as the means of action of the projection forces.
Another phase began, dominated by the manufacture of equipment and its delivery to the armies. In the years to come, the share of manufacturing in equipment expenditure devoted to conventional weapons must gradually increase.
This increase in traditional manufacturing is a priority. It corresponds to operational necessity, set in our policy of armament and equipment of the armed forces. It allows the delivery of major equipment for the action of the forces, renewing weapon systems designed and produced for the most part in the 1970s. It is consistent with the emphasis that we now place on a new strategy for the use of our traditional means, far from the national territory, in an environment that is most often multinational.
It is now up to the defense effort to both ensure the delivery of essential equipment to the armies in the coming years, taking into account their missions, and to initiate changes gradually preparing the adaptation of the defense model. armies of the years 2000-20 10. It also allows us to give its place to an arms industry which contributes to our sovereignty and plays a dynamic role in our strategic and economic development.
However, we must simultaneously leam, with regard to the definition of means, the lessons of the crises in which we have been engaged since 1990 and prepare the armies of the years 2000-20 15. This involves, for example, the study and development of new means of space intelligence, equipment meeting the requirements of strategic and tactical mobility of forces, or power projection.
140


141 Finally, we must take into account the strategic uncertainty which characterizes the period to come, which the scenarios presented above reflect, including with regard to the future of our security in Europe. . A certain pause in the modemization of our nuclear tools should make it possible to increase the effort for the benefit of conventional equipment. However , an action of this type would only produce savings in the medium term. of our policy . A policy of reducing costs indicated elsewhere, be committed to compatible with budgetary resources. Cost excesses, which render programming efforts meaningless, must be absolutely combated.
On the other hand, this orientation is ambitious for public authorities as a whole. The economic and financial imperatives will indeed be very strong in the armies of the future. The five-year law on the control of public expenditure underlines this by setting, for the next three years! to the average of the annual reduction in the volume of expenditure excluding debt service. Maintaining a notable defense effort is, in this context even more than before, indicative of attachment held both waterings. Arbitrations affecting all current or planned programs will therefore be necessary in order to free up resources and so that the weight of the legacy does not jeopardize the development of the new measures deemed France must, as it is resolved.
These should be made In these conditions, On the one hand, it is binding on our armies and the entire defense system. Elijah will indeed impose an effort of rigor. We can estimate at least 3% the annual growth in volume necessary to finance all current programs. The nature of the missions will require new weapon systems and However, it seems that these adaptations could be facilitated in two ways: defense. constraints and uncertainties which have just been will maintain its efforts throughout the period considered.
This orientation is both restrictive and ambitious.


142 armies .
The weight of defense investments represents more than 50% of the total investments budgeted by The principle of the annual budget cannot provide sufficient visibility for the acquisition of equipment whose study and development extends over ten years . This is why it is necessary to resort to planning and then programming. from the nation to this one. Furthermore, the rank of a nation depends on its defense effort but also on its economic situation and its competitiveness. reference In this context, stabilizing the defense effort at its current level over the next fifteen years will require choices.
The aim of planning is to define army models over a period of around fifteen years. It sets the major missions and indicates the fundamental operational priorities and the essential means necessary to achieve these objectives.
The last planning exercise was launched in 1981, in the context of the Cold War, and completed in 1983 with the definition of the 2000 model and the associated 95 models. No comprehensive planning has been completed since that date.
If it is illusory to envisage an increase in resources devoted to defense in the coming years, their maintenance is an ambition which implies in particular not using the necessary credits as an element of adjustment of the budgetary balance . Given for the medium term, this ambition nevertheless comes up against a short-term difficulty. France's public finances have deteriorated profoundly. The public debt burden reached 200 billion francs in 1993. The restoration of our economic situation implies a rapid recovery of these finances. However, the projections made as part of the preparation of the next programming law show a gap of several dozen. francs between the credits available by the year 2000 and the model .
2 PLANNING AND PROGRAMMING


And There constraint of the budgetary annuality, the principle of which rigorously sets the limits of programming and budget preparation work. It is also subject to the necessary to plan the environment and support flows (logistics, a only a provisional nature and cannot commit beyond the horizon of the year of the armies in liaison with the General Delegation for Armaments for financial which determines the budgetary procedure form of law, it specifies operational priorities and defines choices regarding its technical translation expects a horizon of five to six years. Speaking under arbitrations, to set the financial level of the effort it intends to devote to Defense and multi-annual programming. Under the terms of the order of January 2, 1959, budgetary. The practical interpretation of these provisions has never suffered each year covered. Six laws have been passed since 1960, the 1994 project industrial, which, if not first in the definition of a major equipment. It determines the forecast financial envelope for Programming, like more generally the definition of policy long-term planning, which will outline the steps to achieve a long industrial and to ensure consistency between programs. She is also a defined in particular by the General Staff The orientations defined in this White Paper will be translated into a Programming is an essential tool to cover a process of needs The implementation of these three logics is mainly carried out during the evaluation of multi-year expenditure made within the framework of the program laws has not new model of armies. It will be presented to the Defense Council.
equipment, uses three logics: infrastructure, munitions). Finally, it is an opportunity for the govemment to make was not submitted to a vote by Parliament. equipment needs, remains a major concem. mitigations. to submit the whole thing to Parliament for approval.


144 In order to improve monitoring of programming, an annual report from the Minister of Defense to the Prime Minister will report, each year, on the execution of the military programming law.
However, the constitution of our defense tool has shown that a strong and constant will alone will make it possible to effectively translate the desired effort.
Otherwise, the implementation of the programs deviates so much from the intentions that the forecast loses all meaning.
Multi-annual programming laws will ensure the financial translation of the directions of the White Paper and future long-term planning. In terms of content, a programming law must include all the elements essential to the coherence of the planned developments. It is therefore necessary to include all investments (Title V). But experience shows that the distinction between operating credits (Title III) and investment credits (Title V) does not always make it possible to reflect the coherence and scope of the corresponding expenditure. This is why it seems necessary to plan a workforce schedule . This forecast should extend to wartime personnel, that is to say after mobilization.






145
1. ARMY AND NATION.
Chapter 9: Defense and Society
PART
DEFENSE AND SOCIETY The Republican army resulting from the revolution and founded on this duty that every French person has to contribute to the defense of his country, whatever form it takes, over the years, has crossed two centuries of which many moments do not were not far from harmonious. But that the French people remain, all things considered, responsible for their defense, is the main vector of the spirit of defense which unites Since in 1439, by a royal order, known as Orlans, declared in conformity by the states of the Kingdom necessary intermediary bodies, then, for the re-establishment of royal power Charles VII established the permanent army, the history of France has been inseparable from that of his army. centralized and the regular army to shape most of the values of French society, from the imperative of rule to the sense of public service. Over the centuries, if men and govemments change, if the form of war modifies, the necessity of combat remains and the genius of France is faithfully reflected in the mirror of its army (Ch DE GAULLE La France et son army) Two centuries ago, the nation in arms: the decrees of 1793 and the Jourdan law of 1798 cannot be understood if we ignore the birth of a new society which also makes the citizen a soldier who makes his principles triumph across Europe which follows a movement , a twisted story. founded their Nation on the consent of each citizen to live under a common law. If the revolution was also a form of tearing in our history, which was perpetuated through lively quarrels whose echoes we still perceive today, the immense legislative work, the affirmation of new principles, the momentarily successful bringing together of French people remain. Above all, with the emergence of citizens on the political scene, a new type of relationship between defense and society is also being created.
Army-Nation relations


146 it is up to us to say the effort that the nation is ready to make, to assume its meaning, to preserve its duration.
At a time when, more than ever, there is only defense in its globality and permanence, the growing permeability between defense and society, the men and women who compose them, the challenges they face, the fruitful search for their unity, their identity, their singular community, everything militates so that the exemplarity of the links which unite them and which are, also, a powerful element of the republican continuity of our country is understood and confirmed.
It is expressed, first of all, through the fabric of French municipalities whose million elected officials are a powerful vector of the civic spirit and the spirit of defense combined, an unparalleled development network and a powerful lever of an incitement to the common effort of the Nation for its defense.
At the forefront of these, Parliament, its committees, its powers: to it the Army to the Nation of which it is both the prism and the mirror which means that we cannot conceive of one without the other. spreads. also, through the links which unite Defense to , This spirit of defense is based not on a narrow nationalism, but on an open patriotism, which defends universal values throughout France: for this reason, it is only truly strong and assured when it unites the entire nation.
Institutes like the Institute of Advanced National Defense Studies are the privileged instrument of this dialogue between the Army and the Nation and the guarantee of the unity of thought, study and spirit of defense, gathered within a Military School where everything converges so that it is restored as the place par excellence for an intellectual meeting between society and defense. nationally and at universities. Respect the great achievements of the past, draw from them models of value, effort, commitment to the service of others; understand ideas, attitudes, differences also between different and complex systems and shed light on the future together, become aware that defending, educating, training are common issues, many aspects of which are shared.
Finally, it can be explained by an unfailing desire to inform. Informing presupposes a great capacity to exchange, to listen, to understand, which translates into concrete places, by spaces of public debate where the Nation finds its Army.
This shows the importance of civic spirit.


147 The first is that of information actions on the military institution. They make understanding easy and gain the support of public opinion. The explanatory effort maintained for twenty years, with real success, deserves to be continued and developed.
At the same time, information and public relations actions aimed to make public opinion better aware of the image of a modem army. The humanitarian actions in which they play a role in the service of the United Nations have increased their credibility in public opinion, sensitive to the criteria of solidarity and usefulness. notably The desire to develop this policy of relations between the Army and the Nation will materialize by prioritizing four areas of action.
This situation makes possible a less rigid and more in-depth approach to defense issues in our country. The rapprochement between Defense and national security must be continued and accentuated in order to promote the renewal of the civic spirit, since society and youth better understand the importance of security problems in the contemporary world and the role of defense in national life.
The specificity of the armies must finally not suffer but on the contrary be enriched by any expansion of the field of action that they cover and which contributes to national defense, considered in its broadest sense.
The second concems institutions and The third area is larger and more difficult to explore, but it is no less important for the future of strategic thinking in France. These are research and reflection centers which offer academics, industrialists, sociologists, historians, military civilians: to work together to imagine and propose possible ways of tomorrow's defense foundations and institutes, private or public , where the defense collective will develop and strategic thinking will flourish, places where new forms of expression of violence will be studied, where modem public discourse adapted to the geostrategic environment will be formulated Development Efforts which bring together representatives of civil society and the military world to create exchanges.
The development of civilian forms of national service, the participation of the armies in public service missions, particularly in the area of population protection, are judged favorably by our fellow citizens. These feelings, on the whole favorable to the military institution, are certainly due to the recognition of the operational function of the armies, but also to the appreciation of its social role, and its contribution to the cohesion of society . .


Finally, the revitalization of the reserves will contribute to the defense effort, based on the deep aspiration of many reservists to participate concretely in the defense of the country; in all forms and firstly in military forms to which their operational nature gives priority, but also in forms relating to non-military defense which call for revisions of defense allocation mechanisms. These so-called civilian reserves deserve particular attention and their organization will become a privileged path for bringing together the armies and civil society.
Linked to the concept of force building, the idea of a civil-military dipole appears to be one of the best responses to the multifaceted risks weighing on the country's security.
148
2. CIVILIAN FORMS OF NATIONAL SERVICE. current and in the spirit of the times. This renewal of strategic thinking will be based on a strong current of reflections and will need to make itself known and expressed.
Defense problems, more familiar and better understood by citizens, will then be naturally integrated into national life.
The so-called civilian forms of national service are part of such an evolution which, to the extent that it remains measured and controlled, can consolidate in the spirit In reality, the harmony of national armies presupposes a balanced and recognized sharing of each other's responsibilities. It is for this reason that a military presence spread across the entire national territory is essential. key to defense, the army, through its presence, raises civil society awareness of vigilance.
Military service remains the backbone of national service. It gives it its legitimacy. But the evolution of the notion of defense, extended to all sectors of national life as well as certain aspects of intemational life, allows the diversification of the methods of execution of the service.
The density of the military fabric to which the Armies and the Gendarmerie contribute, whether they are force units, services, schools, or various installations, contributes to the feeling of security. In the event of a crisis, and without ignoring its own responsibilities, the community expects the armed forces to fulfill their specific missions, and to remain what they are: the most complete element of national cohesion.


149
Since 1965, public the tradition of national service it broadens its base it confirms the same approach of solidarity. In the eyes of public opinion, in fact, those forms of national service which fully participate in defense are justified, in accordance with the 1959 ordinance. This explains the parallel development over the past thirty years of multiple civilian forms which, with military service, for the most part have objectives of solidarity and social cohesion, and which are carried out for the benefit of the national community and the development of friendly countries. civil forms of national service have been legalized:
The current situation To these official civilian forms of national service were added concluded between the Ministry of Defense and other departments prot repatriates ministerial training: Veterans (since professional disabled (199 national education (199 city (199 employment environment (1993). These The protocols aim to place conscripts carrying out their military service at the disposal of civilian organizations. They concemed 5,100 conscripts in 1993.
In total, civil forms and protocols represented, in 1994, a workforce of 27,000, or nearly 10% of the contingent. In addition, more than 8,000 military conscripts are assigned annually to units such as, for example, those of civil security, or the Paris and Marseille firefighters.
Criticisms bom from insufficiently controlled development the technical assistance service since 1965: 1,000 called in 1994; the cooperation service since 1965: 6,200 called; the conscientious objector service since 1983: 5,000 called; service in the national police since 1985: 8,700 conscripts; the civil security service since 1992: 960 called.
Some of the civilian forms are very close to the service carried out in the armies: by the duration, by the type of employment, by the living conditions of the conscripts. These are services in the national police, the fire brigade and other civil security units. These forms of service are not criticized, even if they exert a strong selection on the contingent.


The necessary reform must have a threefold goal: to give a legal basis to the system, to rationalize and simplify it, to enable its control in a more effective manner.
In total, several civil forms are Although beneficial, other forms of service today present various defects. linked, essentially, to their development considered excessive and to execution methods that are often poorly controlled.
As for the development of civil forms, the first necessity is to impose management without favoritism of the resource. The current opacity of the procedures for choosing conscripts, which gives too much emphasis to co-optation, must be replaced by greater transparency. . Directions for the future Some of these forms have moved away, more or less, from their initial objective. This is the case with those called technical aid and conscientious objection, which are sometimes used in ways that are inconsistent with the initial objectives.
Likewise, and above all, while the cooperation service aims to involve young people in the development of foreign countries, it is carried out mainly in developed countries in Europe and North America. The three countries which welcome the most volunteers are the United States of America, Great Britain and Germany.
If civil forms correspond to a real need and are a source of consolidation of national service, various orientations must strengthen the bases of harmonious and sustainable development.
Civilian conscripts also benefit from advantages that are often much higher than those granted for military service. This is particularly the case for protocols and cooperative service. Certain forms can also hide the start of a professional career.
As for the purposes of civil forms, greater rigor is necessary to retum to the intention of the legislator (technical assistance, conscientious objectors, cooperation).
The ambiguous status of the protocols cannot be kept as is. These should partly be transferred to civilian forms of national service, and for the rest have a legal basis which would limit them to well-defined and temporary actions . as offering a possibility of avoiding restrictive service and obtaining material advantages, whereas military service would, from these points of view, be penalizing. This lack of rigor and transparency in the conditions of recruitment and execution of the service contributes to the existence of a feeling of inequality between civilian and military conscripts.
150


3. CIVIL DEFENSE Intemational developments and the appearance of new threats require the development of a global concept of defense within which civil defense would find the essential role that it deserves.
The armies permanently participate in the general security system by providing specialized units, Paris firefighters, Marseille firefighters, civil security training and intervention units.
As for the remuneration system of The Minister of the Interior can obtain the support of the armies, and if necessary in various circumstances The current organization of civil defense and military participation. their serving in civil forms , unification is necessary (pay and benefit regimes).
Civil defense missions are normally devolved to the Minister of the Interior, who has his own resources for this purpose, civil security and the national police. The civil security department's priority mission is to protect the population. It uses specialized resources - planes, helicopters, mine clearance teams - and relies on some 230,000 increasingly professional firefighters. The national police, with 130,000 men, ensures the maintenance of order and surveillance of the territory and interventions for the benefit of sensitive installations. The air and border police are responsible for border control.
The second orientation must concem the control of civil forms and As for the current durations of services, they must be retained: 20 months for conscientious objection, 16 months for technical assistance and cooperation and 10 months for services comparable to military service.
The Minister of the Interior benefits, for the maintenance of order and the protection of sensitive points, from the permanent assistance of the national gendarmerie. their coordination. Each minister must be responsible for the supervision and employment of young French people assigned to him, with the Minister of Defense retaining a role in ensuring national coherence of the resource. In liaison with the Minister of Defense, the Prefect must receive locally, in his department, the mission of coordinating and controlling the conditions of execution of the civil forms of national service. A committee composed of civil and military officials will be placed with him .
151


For the mission of maintaining the continuity of govemment action, the armies can participate in the protection of sensitive installations (priority defense installations, first and second category sensitive points). Finally, the need for the govemment to maintain the continuity of its action, to protect the populations and to safeguard the organs essential to national defense, could lead it to decide to implement operational territorial defense (DOT). ). This would only be fully implemented in the event of extemal aggression or a clear threat. Then, and as necessary, it would bring together all the strong forces of the nation to oppose any attack on the territory anywhere. The maritime defense of the territory, the air defense of the territory, all of civil defense and the DOT form the Defense of the Territory. Its organization is global. Its implementation is adapted to the circumstances.
For the population protection mission, it is a question of calling on immediately available intervention capacities, large numbers of personnel, specialized resources which the civil services do not have. This competition is becoming more frequent over the years.
A new development for civil defense For the mission of maintaining public order, which is primarily the responsibility of the police and the national gendarmerie, the participation of the armed forces must remain exceptional and limited to serious crisis situations.
Furthermore, the armies can provide occasional decisive assistance in the implementation of minimum operating plans. If necessary, they then provide staff and means of transport.
This effort in favor of civil defense is primarily the responsibility of the administration concemed: Interior, Transport, Communication, Energy, Industry, Economy. In their respective fields, they must take into account this dimension of the defense effort. Bringing out this priority requires, as is emphasized elsewhere, that an interministerial grouping of the various budgets Faced with new threats of whatever nature, which can affect territorial security, everyone must become aware of their responsibilities. Without necessarily imagining new structures, we must reduce our vulnerability to attacks on the security of sensitive installations, communications and access to vital centers.
These different areas require specific responses. Likewise, civil security units must be able to effectively carry out their mission of protecting populations, by providing them with the necessary means of response and relief.
152


153 allows us to account for it, in a specific document. Otherwise, civil defense would continue to remain secondary, despite the reaffirmed objective of a global concept of defense.
This increased role of civil defense does not imply entrusting the armies tasks that fall to others. The effort made must make it possible to request measured assistance. The armies must not replace, either in action on the ground, or in the minds of officials and citizens, the means of civil security. We must avoid trivializing their interventions: they must only intervene when the civil means available to the administrations - or those that they may have required - are insufficient, unsuitable, non-existent, or when the emergency justifies it .
At the central level, Senior Defense Officials, placed directly with ministers to assist them in the exercise of their defense responsibilities, will intensify their action by focusing, on the one hand, on detecting the main vulnerabilities of the defense sectors. activities falling within the area of competence of their ministry in order to prepare possible parades and responses, on the other hand to verify as soon as they are developed that the measures taken in their sector take into account the constraints of defense. To this end, they will benefit from reinforced power.
Finally, the relevance of the concept of operational territorial defense (DOT) is no longer imposed with the same force today. Even if it cannot be This exceptional nature of the intervention of the armies must be particularly emphasized in the case of maintaining public order. This is a mission for which the armies are not trained, for which recourse to them, when decided, must be carried out within the framework of legal provisions. It normally remains circumscribed and limited to support and support missions. To maintain the continuity of the public service, the establishment of a reduced service provided by the civilian companies concemed is preferable to the substitution of these services by the armies. interior.
However, the effectiveness of military interventions for the benefit of civil defense must be maintained. The optimal use of the armies is all the more essential as the reduction of their format, and in particular that of the army, significantly lightens the traditional national military fabric. Some departments do not host any military units other than those of the gendarmerie. This discontinuity in the territorial system should in no way diminish the effectiveness of the armed forces' response to defense requirements. The objective is to identify the units of the armed forces which will be capable of intervening quickly, throughout the country, with the means in terms of specialized personnel and equipment, as soon as those available to the territorial level concemed prove insufficient or unsuitable.
This is a new concept, that of


Coordination of civil and military powers The protection of populations therefore requires a partnership between The coordination of civil and military powers must make it possible to ensure civil defense interventions under conditions of maximum efficiency. The most appropriate level is that of the defense zone, a place where civil and military skills are best articulated. This level of common and interministerial law in matters of defense must be strengthened, both on a budgetary level and through the assistance of personnel from the various ministries.
And The quality of relations uniting the prefectural authority and the military authority is essential to the smooth running of operations which are often of an emergency nature.
Therefore, these relationships must pre-exist and be maintained both at the defense zone level and on the ground. Within the defense zone, the general commanding the military defense district is best placed to provide advice to the zone prefect in the use of the armed forces' resources. It coordinates the action of land defense which brings together all the actions that can be carried out by the armies for the benefit of civil defense. elected officials, even if unity of direction of operations constitutes a major requirement in the management of all situations of tension or instability. Mayors play a significant role in providing support to prefects, through the exercise of their Exception to the general purpose of the defense zone, the use of certain very specialized military means must come directly under the central administration, or even the national political authority. Likewise, the national level must ensure coordination between the different defense zones and the transfer of the required means when they are not stationed in the zone concemed. ruled out because of the mortal risks it presents, the hypothesis of a major conflict in Europe, the integrity of the territory and the survival of the nation, is unlikely on the horizon of the White Paper. To take this new situation into account, the notion of land defense, which must be deepened, corresponds to taking into account, from normal times, the possibility of serious and high intensity crises where the assistance of the Armed Forces is essential to the functioning of institutions.
Finally, the eminent role of local authorities and elected officials must be underlined. First and foremost, the mayor is the guarantor of the security of his constituents; he has in-depth and pragmatic knowledge of local realities and the needs of a population for which he assumes, at the first level, responsibility. This knowledge of the environment is an irreplaceable and essential contribution to civil defense, both in the implementation of protection measures and in the dissemination of information on risk management.
154


developments.
155 Security imperatives and economic rules come into contradiction. The problems posed by the oil regime or the control of airspace are clear proof of this.
Like civil defense, economic defense is growing in importance, given new threats and vulnerabilities. Its necessary strengthening must be part of European construction.
With the common defense and security policy, the Treaty on European Union opens the way to such a process, through the prospect of an adjustment of the legal frameworks of the member states.
The effectiveness of national defense systems is affected by these Economic defense and European construction police powers in particular. This role must develop widely in the preparation and implementation of civil defense efforts, within each defense zone.
France's economic policy decisions are now, in large part, transferred to the European level, both for the development of decisions and for the definition of margins for national action. As a result, economic defense is only partially a national responsibility. This is the case with the protection of basic economic activities and the control of technology transfers, to cite just these two examples.
Community construction is the source of new interdependencies, which, by their very nature, go beyond the borders of a single State. In addition, the principles of free movement of people, goods and services may oppose the ability of States to mobilize all available and necessary means in the event of crises.
The growing inadequacy of the national level to define an economic defense policy is combined with the equally increased need for such a policy.
The solution involves the eventual creation of a European economic defense.
4. ECONOMIC DEFENSE.


The third sector is that of technologies and industry. It includes space, electronics, IT, aeronautics and nuclear power. . . A European policy is necessary, such as in the space domain, and must therefore take into account the imperatives of economic defense. In other cases, in the absence of any common policy, the solution involves coordinating the policies of the different States concemed.
The first is that of the arms industry. In application of Article 223 of the Treaty of Rome, the decision-making autonomy of States remains complete.
The fourth sector includes all the capabilities which do not concem us All of the guidelines mentioned above regarding developments in defense-related industries must make it possible to contain and reduce our vulnerabilities in this area. directly the defense? but which represent the keys to independence of fundamental research, nuclear engineering, data banks, and certain specific productions. The link with the defense is sometimes difficult to establish for some of these activities. However, it is obvious and cannot be overlooked or ignored.
The second sector is that of basic services without which no defense can be organized. These include transport and its infrastructure, civil engineering, energy production and storage, telecommunications and distribution networks (water, gas, electricity, oil, etc.). The planned deregulations will require these services to be taken into account, at the national and European levels, with the aim of giving States the possibility of carrying out requisitions. Actions to project military forces may in fact require the requisition or chartering under legal constraint of means of air or maritime transport.
A diversified economic defense
:
Reducing our economic vulnerabilities arises in different terms, depending on the more or less strategic nature of the activities. It is important to seek and implement, in liaison with our European partners, responses adapted to each sector.
The legal instruments as well as the coordination structures which will make it possible to achieve them will have to be gradually developed . Four sectors are to be prioritized.
156


The effort will focus, first and foremost, on the preparation of summaries intended for govemment authorities.
The new importance of intelligence is the consequence of intemational developments. It must be taken into account in the organization and activity of the competent French structures.
Information is now at the heart of the functioning of our democracies.
Superabundant, and partial at the same time, it continuously influences populations naturally disposed to be moved, to be indignant or to worry when faced with the image of events likely to impress them. This phenomenon, which affects The new expression of needs will lead to the strengthening of the coordination of intelligence activities through flexible and appropriate structures.
This challenge requires us to make strategic intelligence a real priority, which must benefit from the resources essential to the capabilities required of it.
Improving this function therefore requires concentrating efforts, better integrating it into the decision-making process of senior govemment authorities, and developing research leadership at ministerial and interministerial levels .
The guidance and coordination of their activities in this area are ensured, under the authority of the Prime Minister, by the Interministerial Intelligence Committee (CIR). This establishes the national intelligence plan subject to the approval of the President of the Republic. The efforts of the various services for collection, exploitation and counter-intervention must be continued and intensified.
But the multifaceted and permanent nature of contemporary problems, foreign interference, risks of terrorism poses a real challenge to our intelligence system.
6 DEFENSE AND PUBLIC OPINION The national body of doctrine in matters of intelligence complies with the principles of the order of January 2, 1959. The intelligence function thus covers all areas of govemment action. At the very heart of the issues of national sovereignty, thus constituting a primary imperative of defense, most ministries participate directly.
The challenge
5. THE INTERMINISTERIAL ORGANIZATION OF INTELLIGENCE.
157


The Armed Forces Information and Public Relations Services (SIRPA) are responsible, on the one hand, for processing defense information, and on the other hand for promoting the armed forces. This last aspect of their action is permanent and independent, most of the time, from direct news.
Public authorities and the media can have divergent opinions of the seriousness of a situation, the latter dramatizing facts otherwise considered trivial, or on the contrary considering as secondary what the govemment considers important.
Furthermore, a bidding war is always possible between media subject to economic imperatives of competition. The reality of a situation can be completely distorted: recent examples of this are frequent. Finally, the media, for technical reasons, may be led to summarize, to present the spectacular, like a shock image extracted from its context, emphasizing the sensational while only very imperfectly describing the situation.' The right balance seems difficult to find between total freedom and restriction of information. In the first case, the preservation of secrecy, the safety of people and the smooth running of an operation could be compromised. In the second, the action of public authorities would undoubtedly be facilitated, but what confidence could public opinion place in censored information?
Transparency and partnership all Westem countries, tends to cause public opinion to react uniformly. Its excesses require reflection in matters of defense and lead to questions about the processing and prioritization of information by the media.
In the particular case of terrorist actions, the means of information are of capital importance. Without them, terrorism has only limited action. With the impact that the media can give to any action of this type, it becomes a scourge capable of undermining the reaction capacities of the most solid democracies.
The national interest and respect for democratic rules must make it possible to define the field of action where representatives of defense and the media can work together, clearly and effectively. The basic principle in this regard is that of transparency. To avoid actions of disinformation - false noises, rumors, suspicions, interpretations -, everyone must first strive to disseminate precise and clear factual information and react immediately by following as closely as possible.
The capacity to manipulate public opinion using such instruments is therefore real in times of crisis; it can disrupt the functioning of public authorities; it can, ultimately, serve the national interest and defense.
158


in fact must be established between the information services of the armies and joumalists accredited and educated in defense problems. Armed forces officers responsible for relations with the media must have training in information techniques; be true media specialists. the course of events finally when it is proven and necessary, to announce and justify any retention or any control.
The same knowledge of professional techniques, the same ethics of information, the same concem to serve the national interest and democracy, these will be the joint qualities of both parties for a successful partnership.
This orientation presupposes mutual trust between defense officials and media representatives. Everyone must understand and accept the constraints inherent to each type of situation. This trust, the result of regular attendance, will be reinforced by the establishment of a consultation and advice body, where both parties will be able to better assess the needs, requirements and constraints of each. We would then discuss the procedures to follow in times of crisis and conflict or the processing of information, leading to confusion or interpretation in certain normal situations. A certain number of rules, supported by experience and commonly accepted, will thus gradually emerge. a 159




War has today retumed to our daily lives. In its most insidious forms, as well as in its most horrible forms: unstable societies, regional, ethnic, cultural or religious conflicts.
When a strategy meets This culture of defense is not an obligatory consensus, which would be based on an illusory feeling of security. the values of a society and the intelligence of situations, then a culture of defense emerges. This is the ambition of this White Paper on defense, which wants to bear the mark and trace of France, of its influence and its memory, of its heritage and its history.
Finally, he must be convinced of the strength of the link that exists between a vigilant and effective defense policy and a foreign policy based on the search, maintenance and development of peace in the world.
In the constant dialogue between memory and modemity, we must reflect on new forms of reconquest of collective consciousness, without which there is neither citizenship nor identity. Today's civics and identity are open, not closed as they could have been. Nineteenth century. In a modem and democratic society, it is the condition for the citizen, an actor in collective life, that defense is everyone's business, therefore his own so that in retum, in a context of weakening ties social, the armed forces carry out a function of integrating French people, of all origins, into a common destiny and a hope He must then become aware of the fact that defense is based on coherence of thinking, but also on some sacrifices. Today's comfort, even if it is relative, cannot be acquired at the cost of extemal insecurity or national collapse tomorrow.
The values that we defend - democracy, law, human rights - are not universally shared. France is part of a minority of privileged countries, whose ideals which underpin the spirit of defense must be forcefully reaffirmed.
A citizen must, first of all, know all that our particular situation requires in terms of financial, technological, intellectual efforts, but also the commitment of all, civil and military: one of the countries with global responsibilities.
160 common.
CONCLUSION


Mr Philippe MARLAND Vice-President of the Council Mr. Air Force General Achille LERCHE Army chief Mr Marceau LONG Head of the Prime Minister's military office Admiral Jacques LANXADE Defense Minister Mr Bemard de MONTFERRAND General Delegate for Mr Henri Secretary General of National Defense Govemor of the Invalides Secretary General for Mr Franois Mr. General of the Army Maurice SCHMITT Advisor for Diplomatic Affairs to the Prime Minister Rear Admiral Patrick LECOINTRE Advisor for Intemal Affairs to the Prime Minister Project Manager to the Minister Mr Renaud DONNEDIEU de VABRES White Paper Commission Prime Minister Defense President Members


Mr Franois BARRY-DELONGCHAMP Mr Jean-Claude MALLET Foreign Senior Defense Official Defense Minister Ambassador of France to Prefect Mr Jean RIOLACCI General Director of Industrial Strategies Head of Strategic Affairs Department Mr Jrme PAOLINI Ministry of Post and Telecommunications Industry and Foreign Trade Director in charge of Strategic Affairs Directorate of Political Affairs Project manager to the Minister of Affairs Mrs. Isabelle BOUIILLOT Higher and Research Project Manager to the Minister of Mr Bruno RACINE Mr Jean-Marie GUEHENNO Head of the Minister's Military Cabinet Mr Didier LOMBARD Director of the analysis and forecasting center (CAP) Mr. Air Corps General Jean RANNOU Budget Director Interior Foreign Affairs Research Budget Industry


Personalities Permanent Secretariat Police station Cooperation Atomic Court of Audit Mr. Thierry de MONTBRIAL Rear Admiral Philippe Director of Cabinet of the Minister of Cooperation Mr Jean PRADA General Secretariat of National Defense General Eric of the Ambassador Mr Roger Department of Defense Strategic Affairs Delegation Mr Gabriel ROBIN Inspector General of the Armed Forces Master of Requests to the Council Mr Marc GUILLAUME Director of Military Applications Mr. Army General Mary-Jean VOINOT Mr Antoine POUILLIEUTE Mr Raymond LEVY Honorary President of RENAULT SA Director of Mr. Rector Michel ALLIOT


EVOLUTIONS IN STRATEGIC FORCES
PRESENCE OF FRANCE IN THE WORLD
COMPARATIVE GROWTH IN THE BUDGET OF
CHAPTER 8
COMPARATIVE PROFESSIONALIZATION OF
THE FORCES IN 1993 (EU-FR-GB-ALL)
METROPOLITAN TERRITORY
COMPARATIVE EVOLUTION OF DEFENSE CHARGE/
GDP (EU-FR-GB-ALL)
THE STATE, DEFENSE INVESTMENTS (TITLE V) OF GDP
EXAMPLE OF DEPLOYMENT OUTSIDE
ARTICULATION OF ARMED FORCES
DEFENSE AND PUBLIC OPINION
CHAPTER 9
APPLIED SET THEORY
CHAPTER 5
NUCLEAR PROVIDED FOR BY THE AGREEMENTS
SUPERVISION AND SUPERVISION RATE
CHAPTER 6
PLANS
ILLUSTRATION
CHAPTER 1
CHAPTER3
MAPS OF EUROPE IN
THE EUROPE OF ALLIANCES
START 1 AND START II
CHAPTER 4
AND 1993
