Machine Translated by Google

www.studiperlapace.it ________________ Publications Center for Peace Studies The publication is the result of the assembly of the documents downloaded from the website www.difesa.it.
Tables, explanatory tables and the like are omitted . Reproduction without official character.
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE* Editor: General Pietro Giannattasio www.difesa.it
December 20, 2001
WHITE PAPER 2002 *


- The process of “intemal adaptation”
1.2.3 The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
- The Open Skies Treaty
- The NATO High Level Group - The NATO Senior Defense Group on Proliferation (DGP)
- The BIOLOGICAL WEAPON CONVENTION – BWC l Command Structure Review l Force Structure Review l DCI - Defense Capabilities Initiatives
2.1 THE LINE OF COMMAND
2.1.1 The Head of State
2.1.2 The Supreme Defense Council
2.1.3 The Parliament
2.1.4 The President of the Council of Ministers
2.1.5 The Minister of Defense
1.2.4 The Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE)
1.2.5 The Westem European Union (WEU)
1.1 EVOLUTION OF THE GEOSTRATEGIC FRAMEWORK AND THE MISSIONS OF THE ARMED
FORCES
1.2.6 The European Union
1.2.6.1 The evolutionary process of European Defense
1.2.6.2 The future developments of European Defense
1.2 THE WORLD FRAMEWORK AND THE SUBJECTS OF INTERNATIONAL POLITICS: UN, WEU, EU, NATO,
OSCE
1.3 THE INNOVATIVE PROCESS OF NATIONAL DEFENSE Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
1.3.1 Military Political Relations
1.3.2 Disarmament and non-proliferation regimes
- General information - The CFE Treaty - The Vienna Document - The Dayton Agreements - The Stability Pact - The Ottawa Convention on the ban on antipersonnel mines - The Convention on the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons - Small Arms And Light Weapons (SALW)
1.2.1 General
1.2.2 The United Nations (UN) ____________
1.2.3.1 The New Strategic Concept of NATO 1.2.3.2 The “new” NATO - The process of “extemal adaptation”
THE DEFENCE
PART I
INDEX
PART II
THE SITUATION: FROM THREAT TO RISK
PREMISE 2.1.5.1 The Undersecretaries of State
2.3.2.8 General Directorate of the Commissariat and General Services
(COMMISERVIZI)
2.3.2.6 General Directorate of Aeronautical Armaments (ARMAEREO)
2.3.5.1 The General Organization and the General Staff 2.3.5.2 The Organization of the Operational Forces 2.3.5.3 The Peripheral/Territorial Organization 2.3.6 The Air Force
2.3.6.1 The new Air Force 2.3.6.2 The General Staff of Air Force 2.3.6.3 Structural Aspects 2.3.7 The Carabinieri 2.3.7.1 The restructuring 2.3.7.2 The military tasks 2.3.7.3 The structure
2.3.7.4 The General Command
2.3.7.5 Technical and Administrative Logistics Groups (RTLA)
2.3.2.9 General Directorate of Works and State Property (GENIODIFE)
2.2 THE RESTRUCTURING OF THE ARMED FORCES 2.2.1 Legislative legislation 2.2.2 The succession of legislative decrees 2.2.3 The Chief of Defense
Staff 2.2.4 The Secretary General of Defense and National Director of Armaments 2.2.5 The Heads of State Major of the Armed Forces 2.2.6 The General Commander of the Carabinieri 2.2.7 The Committee of Chiefs of Staff 2.2.8 Security: 2.2.8.1 The SISMI
2.2.8.2 The RIS (Information and Security Department)
2.3.7.6 The Barracks
2.3.7.7 The Training Organization 2.3.7.8 The Territorial Organization 2.3.7.9 The Mobile and Special Organization
2.3 THE DEFENSE ORDER 2.3.1 The Defense General Staff 2.3.2 The General Secretariat of Defense 2.3.2.1 General Directorate for Military Personnel (PERSOMIL)
2.3.2.10 General Directorate of Military Health (DIFESAN)
2.3.3 The Central Offices
2.3.2.2 General Directorate for Civilian Personnel (PERSOCIV)
2.3.2.3 General Directorate of Conscription, Compulsory Recruitment, Militarization, Civil Mobilization and Auxiliary Corps (LEVADIFE)
2.3.3.1 Central Office of Budget and Financial Affairs (BILANDIFE)
2.3.2.4 General Directorate of Land Armaments (TERRARM)
2.3.3.2 Central Office for Administrative Inspections (ISPEDIFE) Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
2.3.4 The Army
2.3.4.1 Army General Staff 2.3.4.2 The Operational Organization 2.3.4.3 The Educational and Training Organization 2.3.4.4 The Logistics
Organization 2.3.4.5 The Territorial
Organization 2.3.4.6 The Inspectorate of
Infrastructure 2.3.4.7 The Inspectorate for Recruitment and Completion Forces 2.3.5 The Navy
2.3.2.5 General Directorate of Naval Armaments (NAVARM) ____________
2.3.2.7 Directorate General of Telecommunications, Information Technology and Advanced Technologies (TELEDIFE) 3


2.3.7.10 Departments for specific needs
2.3.7.11 Departments for central bodies 2.3.7.12 Staff for military tasks
4.1 TASKS - ORGANIZATION 4.2 THE
GENERAL DIRECTORATES 4.3
THE DEFENSE INDUSTRIAL SECTOR
4.6 NATIONAL INDUSTRIAL LANDSCAPE
4.7 SUPPLY POLICY
4.3.1 Organizational structure 4.3.1.1 Before the reform
4.3.1.2 The reform 4.3.1.3 After the reform 4.3.2 Defense Industry Agency
2.4 THE DEFINITION OF “MISSIONS”
4.7.1 Development and implementation of programs 4.7.2 Private negotiation 4.7.3 Advisory committee 4.7.4 Peculiarities relating to the armaments market 4.7.5 Computerization of contractual and "e-procurement" procedures
4.8 MARKETING OF WEAPONS
4.9 RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT AND ACQUISITION 2.4.1
Introduction 2.4.2 The missions 2.4.2.1 Management of intemational crises 2.4.2.2 Multinational formations with Italian participation 2.4.2.3 Italian participation in the new structure of NATO forces 2.4.2.4 The Italian contribution to European defense
4.4 NATIONAL INDUSTRIAL SYSTEM
4.5 INTERNATIONAL CO-PRODUCTION IN THE NATIONAL
INDUSTRIAL PANORAMA 4.5.1 Weag (European Armaments Group)
4.9.1 Joint component 4.9.1.1 C4I function 4.9.1.2 Target recognition, surveillance and acquisition function 4.9.1.3 Intelligence function 4.9.1.4 Mobility functions
4.5.2 OCCAR (Joint Organization for Armaments Collaboration)
3.1 ARTICULATION OF DEFENSE COSTS
4.5.3 LOI (Letter of Intent) Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
4.5.4 Considerations
3.2 BUDGET FORMATION 3.3 TIME
SERIES 3.4 COSTS 3.5
CONCLUSIONS/CONSIDERATIONS ____________
PART IV
PART III
THE INDUSTRIAL APPARATUS
THE ECONOMY 4.9.1.5 Defense/reaction functions
4.9.1.6 Force protection functions 4.9.2 Land component 4.9.2.1 C4I function
4.9.2.2 Defense/reaction function
5.1 THE MILITARY CONDITION 5.1.1 The fact-finding investigation into the military condition
5.5 THE ACCOMMODATION PROBLEM 5.6
MILITARY REPRESENTATION
5.2 RECRUITMENT 5.2.1 The recruitment of enlisted soldiers 5.2.2 The recruitment of non-commissioned officers
5.2.3 The recruitment of special officers 5.2.4 The recruitment of auxiliary officers 5.2.5 The completion forces 5.2.6 Recalls into service from auxiliary 5.2.7 Carabinieri 5.2.8 Female military service 5.2.9 Military chaplains in Italy 5.2.10 Conscientious objection 5.2.11 The balanced force of 2001
4.9.3 Maritime component 4.9.3.1 C4I function 4.9.3.2 Defence/reaction function 4.9.3.3 Force protection function 4.9.4 Air component
4.9.4.1 C4I function 4.9.4.2 Defence/reaction function 4.9.4.3 Mobility function
4.9.4.4 Function sustainability/ logistics/training
4.9.5 Technological research
5.3 CAREER PROCESS (selection, evaluation and criteria)
5.3.1 Officers
5.3.2 NonCommissioned
Officers 5.3.3 Troop 5.3.4 Resignations (excluding Carabinieri)
4.9.5.1 NATO RTO (Research & Technology Organisation)
4.9.5.2 ETAP program (European Technology Acquisition Programme)
5.4 SALARY 5.4.1 Periodic adjustment of salary 5.4.2 Retirement payment 5.4.3 Future developments 5.4.4 Treatment of military personnel engaged in peace operations
4.9.5.3 Test Facilities
4.9.5.4 Research funds 4.9.5.5 “Dual use” technologies and of a humanitarian nature Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
5.4.5 The difference in the economic treatment of the Italian armed forces compared to the NATO Allies ____________
4.10 CONCLUSIONS/CONSIDERATIONS
PART V
MILITARY PERSONNEL 5


6.1.5.1 Managed by the
Army 6.1.5.2 Managed by the Navy
7.5 CIVIL PERSONNEL: A NEW CONCEPTION. PERSPECTIVES 7.6 ROLE OF
STAFF REPRESENTATIVES
7.3 EMPLOYMENT OF CIVIL PERSONNEL
7.4 USE OF EXTERNAL STRUCTURES (OUTSOURCING)
8.1 GENERAL
INFORMATION 8.2 MILITARY JUDICIAL COUNCIL 8.3
MILITARY JUDICIAL ORGANIZATION 8.4 JUDICIAL
ACTIVITY: STATISTICAL DATA 8.5 JUDICIAL STAFF 8.6
NON-JUDICIAL STAFF 8.7 ASSIGNMENT OF
MILITARY STAFF 8.8 ESTABLISHMENT OF GI
POLICE SECTIONS MILITARY JUDICIARY 8.9 THE
MILITARY PENITENTIARY ORGANIZATION (OPM – EXECUTIVE BODIES)
6.1.5 RANGE, TRAINING AREAS AND SIMULATORS.
5.7 STAFF WELL-BEING 5.8 THE
PHENOMENON OF HAZING
7.2 STAFF
6.1 GENERAL INFORMATION - EUROFORMATION
6.1.1 ARMY
6.1.1.1 Officers
6.1.1.2 NonCommissioned
Officers 6.1.1.3 Troop 6.1.1.4 Preparation for operational cycles 6.1.2 NAVY
6.1.2.1 Officers
6.1.2.2 NonCommissioned Officers 6.1.2.3
Troop 6.1.2 .4 Training activities 6.1.3
AIR FORCE 6.1.3.1
Officers 6.1.3.2 NonCommissioned
Officers 6.1.4
CARABINIERI
6.1.4.1 Officers 6.1.4.2 Non-Commissioned Officers 6.1.4.3 Troop 6.1.4.4 Training activity for departments assigned to military tas ____________
7.1 CIVIL PERSONNEL
8.10 CONSIDERATIONS
8.11 APPLICATION OF THE MILITARY CRIMINAL CODE OF PEACE (AND
NOT OF WAR) DURING MILITARY MISSIONS ABROAD –
PROBLEM ASPECTS Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
THE CIVIL PERSONNEL
PART IX
PART VI
PART VIII
PART VII
MILITARY JUSTICE
TRAINING 6


9.4.1 Land segment 9.4.2 Naval segment 9.4.2.1
Food 9.4.2.2
Clothing 9.4.2.3
Barracks 9.4.2.4 Fuels and lubricants 9.4.2.5
Vehicles 9.4.2.6 “Outsourced” services
9.3 POLICY OF INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION IN THE FIELD OF THE TRANSFER OF MATERIALS
9.4.2.7 Current situation - ammunition 9.4.2.8 Current situation - materials 9.4.2.9 Logistics chain of repairs/maintenance
9.1 LOGISTICS - GENERAL INFORMATION
9.4.3 Aeronautical segment
9.4.3.1 Bureaucratic procedures
9.4.4 Carabinieri segment 9.4.4.1 Supply policy in the Carabinieri 9.4.4.2 Logistics organization of the Carabinieri
9.2 CURRENT SITUATION AND FUTURE PROSPECTS
9.5 LOGISTIC SUPPORT POLICY
9.2.1 Procurement Policy 9.2.2 Modemization programs in the field of materials 9.2.3 Modemization programs in the Command, Control, Communications and Information (C3I) sector
9.2.3.1 SICRAL System
9.2.3.2 Joint Forces Digital Network
9.2.3.3 C4I Defense System
9.2.3.4 The Defense Telematics Network (DIFENET)
9.6 STOCK POLICY 9.6.1 Land segment
9.2.4 Modemization programs in the field of land materials 9.2.4.1 The heavy forces block 9.2.4.2 The medium forces block 9.2.4.3 The light forces block 9.2.4.4 New equipment for the soldier 9.2.4.5 Aircraft component 9.2. 4.6 Anti-air defense 9.2.4.7 In the Command and Control/Communications/Computer sector (C4)
9.6.1.1 Spare parts
9.6.1.2 Ammunition
9.6.2 Naval segment
9.6.3 Aviation segment
9.6.3.1 Ammunition and fuel stocks Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
9.2.5 Modemization programs in the naval materials sector 9.2.5.1 Below is the current situation of the main modemization programs of the naval instrument 9.2.5.2 Main programs to be launched for the renewal and modemization of the air-naval instrument according to the "minimum" requirements established 9.2.6 Modemization programs in the aeronautical materials sector 9.2.7 Technological innovation programs in the Carabinieri ____________
9.4 OPERATION POLICY
THE MATERIALS 7


10.4.1 Disposal program 10.4.2 Special cases
10.7 GRANT OF MILITARY STATE LAND PREMISES
9.6.3.2 Commissariat
9.6.3.3 The Mobile Support Department
10.5 NATO INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAMS 10.5.1 NATO resources 10.5.2 AFSOUTH Command 10.5.3 Joint Command SOUTH of Verona
TO WEAPONS AND COMBAT ASSOCIATIONS
11.1 INTERVENTIONS IN FAVOR OF THE COMMUNITY.
10.6 INFRASTRUCTURE PROBLEMS OF THE WEAPON
9.7 MILITARY HEALTH POLICY 9.8 MOVEMENT
AND TRANSPORT POLICY 9.9 SUPPLY POLICY 9.10
CLOTHING AND EQUIPMENT POLICY
11.1.1 General information 11.1.2 Decision-making authority 11.1.3 Constraints 11.1.4 The contribution of the individual FF.AA. and the Carabinieri
11.1.4.1 Army - Natural disasters
- Safeguarding free institutions - Public utilities - Strikes - Undermining of Bailey bridges - Clearing explosive devices - Demolition of illegal buildings - Forest fire prevention campaign - Meteomont Service 11.1.4.2 Navy
10.3.1 Army
10.3.2 Navy
10.3.3 Air Force Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
OF THE CARABINIERI
10.6.1 Introduction
10.6.1.1 Military state property barracks
10.6.1.2 Civil state property barracks
10.6.1.3 Barracks in privately owned properties
10.6.1.4 Acquisition of abandoned properties from the FF.AA.
10.4 DISPOSAL/EXCHANGE PROGRAM ____________
ARMED FORCES AND THE COUNTRY
PART X
PART XI
THE INFRASTRUCTURES
10.1 GENERAL ASPECTS
10.2 CONSTRUCTION OF ACCOMMODATION WITH THE
“PROJECT FINANCING” SYSTEM
10.3 POLICY FOR INFRASTRUCTURES FOR WOMEN VOLUNTEER WORK 8


11.1.4.3 Air Force 11.1.4.4 Carabinieri
12.2.6 Budgetary charges
12.2.7 Armed Forces-Coni agreements
11.2.5.1 Activities of the technical-industrial area 11.2.5.2 Activities of the
Army 11.2.5.3 Activities of the
Navy 11.2.5.4 Activities of the Air
Force 11.2.5.5 Activities of the Carabinieri Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
11.2.1 Previous
11.2.2 Policy and programs
11.2.2.1 Accident Prevention and Environment
Office 11.2.2.2 Joint Forces Working
Group 11.2.2.3 The "Guidelines" of the Ministry of
Defense 11.2.2.4 The Joint Environmental
Directive 11.2.2.5 Training and training of personnel
11.2.2.6 The determination of the organization
11.2.3 Military cooperation Italy – USA 11.2.4 Contribution to environmental protection NATO
11.2.5 Recent environmental protection activity
12.2.5.1 Army sports centers
12.2.5.2 Navy sports centers 12.2.5.3 Air Force sports centers 12.2.5.4 Carabinieri sports centers
12.2 SPORTS ACTIVITY IN THE ARMED FORCES 12.2.1 General information 12.2.2 Mass physical activity 12.2.3 Conservative activity for competitive sports 12.2.4 Conservative activity for executives 12.2.5 The sports centers of FF.AA.
11.2 DEFENSE ACTIVITIES FOR ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
12.4 MILITARY MUSEUMS
12.4.1 General a. Shrine of the flags at the Vittoriano ____________
12.1 MILITARY PUBLICITY 12.1.1 General information 12.1.2
Purposes 12.1.3 Publicity in the joint forces area 12.1.4 Publicity in the Armed Forces area
12.1.4.1 Army
12.1.4.2 Navy
12.1.4.3 Air Force
12.1.4.4 Carabinieri
12.1.5 Communication 12.1.5.1
Introduction 12.1.5.2 The current communication structure of the Armed Forces 12.1.5.3 The information and communication activity of the Public Administrations
12.3 COMBAT ASSOCIATIONS
ARMED FORCES, FIGHTING ASSOCIATIONS
PART XII
HONORS TO THE FALLEN IN WAR
AND WEAPONS, THE MILITARY MUSEUMS, THE GENERAL COMMISSIONER,
MILITARY PUBLICITY, SPORTS ACTIVITY IN 9


Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
12.5 GENERAL COMMISSIONER HONORS TO THE FALLEN IN WAR
12.4.2 Army Museums
12.4.2.1 Historical Museum of the
Infantry 12.4.2.2 Historical Museum of the Grenadiers of Sardinia 12.4.2.3 Historical Museum of the Bersaglieri 12.4.2.4 National Historical Museum of the Alpini 12.4.2.5 Historical Museum of the Cavalry 12.4.2.6 Historical Museum of the Artillery 12.4.2.7 Historical Museum of the Engineer Corps 12.4.2.8 Historical Museum of the Motorization
12.4.3 Museums of the Navy:
12.4.3.1 Historical Naval
Museum 12.4.3.2 Naval Technical Museum 12.4.4 Historical Museum of the Air Force 12.4 .5 Historical Museum of the Carabinieri Tables, explanatory tables and the like are omitted.
12.5.3 Infrastructure
12.5.4 State issues 12.5.5 Miscellaneous
12.5.5.1 Relations with Associations 12.5.5.2
Museums 12.5.5.3 Publications and audio visuals ____________ NB: The publication is the result of the assembly of the documents downloaded from the website www.difesa.it.
Reproduction without official character.
12.5.1 Historical notes and institutional tasks 12.5.2 Research, transfer and definitive arrangement of the Italian Fallen Legislative References APPENDIX: Possible evolutionary lines 10


The large majorities registered in Parliament in support of the missions in Albania and Kosovo, in the past legislature, and in support of our participation in "Enduring Freedom" demonstrate that Italy has developed full national awareness of intemational responsibilities, regardless of contingents majority and opposition roles.
The issues of military security, geopolitics and geoeconomics have become, even in Italy, topics of collective interest, assuming, in the media, a relevance that was not imaginable until the recent past. The White Paper also intends to represent this new awareness of the problems.
The 2002 White Paper was bom from the Govemment's desire to take stock of the situation of the Armed Forces and, more generally, of the entire Defense sector based on the new geo-political framework that emerged after the mass murders perpetrated on 11 September against The United States of America.
Italy and the Italians have closely followed our military in the many operations outside national borders from Africa to the Balkans to Timor; they appreciated his work, his dedication to duty and his professionalism. At the same time, public opinion was an active spectator of the evolution of the military instrument, in particular the entry of women and the launch of the professional model: real and incisive changes in national customs and traditions.
Sixteen years separate us from the previous White Paper, created in 1985 by the then Minister Spadolini.
The White Paper not only serves to wam the country about the centrality of Defence, broadening and consolidating attention and consensus around the Armed Forces and their needs, but also to photograph the existing situation in order to evaluate the effects of the process of change on the national military instrument, compared to the military instruments of other countries in the world, within the framework of an Atlantic Alliance that is rethinking itself and of a Europe aiming to equip itself with a political structure also in the military field.
The Atlantic Alliance, after confirming its role in the management of the crises in the Balkans, has become a mechanism also characterized by "inclusive" logics, no longer just one of opposition to the threat. The openings to the Russian Federation, following Moscow's decisive stance against intemational terrorism, certainly mark the end of an era and give the Alliance greater flexibility, serving both the political role and the military function, within the framework of common values that unite the most recently democratic countries with those that have already consolidated it.
In those years the East-West confrontation was alive, with the issue of Euromissiles, but new commitments were already appearing, anticipated by the missions in Lebanon from 1982 to 1984, as if to announce that season of radical changes in the intemational scenarios that would then open in 1989, with the fall of the Berlin Wall.
The end of the Cold War and the disintegration of the USSR caused ethnic, nationalist, religious and economic tensions to explode along the "arc of crises", as strategic experts call the vast area of the planet that starts, in the West, from North Africa, crosses the Middle East and the Caucasus, extends eastwards to the Gulf, Central Asia, Kashmir until reaching South-East Asia where conflicts of an ethnic-religious nature occur (just think of the case of East Timor). To the North this "arc of crises" has the Balkan appendix, contiguous to our land and maritime borders, through which a complex conflict, with ancient historical roots, has wedged itself into the very heart of Europe.
The progress of the EU's common security and defense policy is another of the comerstones of the security of Italy and - more generally - of Europe and the entire planet. Italy participates in the efforts aimed at creating a first, broad nucleus of European forces, as decided in Helsinki; we know that there are many difficulties as demonstrated by the long, ten-year joumey towards the single currency. However, it is necessary to continue on the path of the common security and defense policy, in parallel with the reform of the Union's institutions, now unavoidable especially in light of the forthcoming enlargement of the Union to the East and towards the Baltic and Mediterranean areas.
The September 11 attacks definitively marked the new reality of security Even the national Armed Forces have changed profoundly compared to the configuration they had in correspondence with the previous White Paper, in 1985. The reform of the top management is a reality with all its beneficial consequences in terms of unity of command and joint vision of the entire military instrument ; the Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it planetary and have confirmed that the threats to be faced in the future have a very different nature from those we have fought and defeated in the past, thanks to the Atlantic cohesion which has united the European and North American democracies in a common effort to defend freedom. Today, an identical cohesion - possibly with a wider participation of States - must counter the dark threat of terrorism , which could end up having weapons of mass destruction and demonstrates the capacity for global organisation, penetration and proselytism not only in areas affected by crises but even in Westem societies. ____________ At the same time, the other innovation that marks a radical break with the context in which the previous White Paper developed is the different approach of public opinion towards the issue of national security.
PREMISE 11


This reformulation of the structure will naturally also have to be extended to the complex of top management bodies which add up - despite the reforms implemented - to 5 General Staff, 10 General Directorates and 2 Central Offices in addition to the Intermediate Commands, Inspectorates and various bodies.
Carabinieri have become the fourth Armed Force; the technical-operational area is still undergoing simplification and streamlining like the technical-administrative and technical-industrial areas. The objective of quality is pursued with greater determination even if many expectations of modemization and professionalization have been frustrated by the limited resources available: a true "sword of Damocles" for national defense and of which only now - under the pressure of terrible threat of intemational terrorism – the negative effect on national security is clearly and widely perceived.
Secondly, another sector to consider is that of means and materials where it appears necessary to define priorities more carefully. On the other hand, the sector is no longer conceivable as an expression of national productivity, but as the result of intemational collaboration and cooperation both due to the high costs achieved by the new weapon systems and the need for so-called "interoperability" within the framework of our alliances .
In concrete terms, the legacy that the 2nd Berlusconi govemment received essentially consists in the large participation in peace-keeping operations, carried out admirably by our military, which however, in terms of presence, altemation and tum-over, is reduced to 9,000 men multiplied by 3: that is, 27,000 soldiers or, at most, 30,000. A small number compared to the 112,000 men of the Army and the approximately 200,000 soldiers of the three "traditional" Armed Forces (excluding the Carabinieri, equal to another 116,000 units), at the end of the "professionalization" phase.
The Air Force and the Navy are currently the Armed Forces most suffering; especially the Air Force, which is not only assessable in terms of aircraft, but also in terms of electronic control of airspace. The recent terrorist attack on the United States has dramatically highlighted the pressing need to ensure security from attacks from the air. Unfortunately, the Italian flaws in this sector are very substantial and emphasized by the lack of piloted interceptors, missiles and radars. Therefore the control of the airspace, which is part of the first task of the Armed Forces in the framework of the defense of the territory, as stated, in its most complete sense of defense of the State, in article 1 of law no. 331 on the suspension of compulsory conscription, will constitute one of the urgent priorities for the near future.
The Navy is not experiencing better times, also because the prolonged use of ships in naval blockade tasks and interventions implemented in the last decade has wom out the ships beyond measure, shortening their average lifespan calculated on the basis of the employment rates of the war era cold.
The numerous series of legislative measures passed by the Govemments of the past 13th legislature, despite the appreciable intention of modemizing the defensive instrument, can be seen as a shock dose inoculated into a body that is not in perfect health because it has been undemourished or cared for a long time with the bare minimum. However, the sudden and massive cure does not yet seem capable of dealing with operational needs which today approach the maximum possibilities sustainable by our military instrument and, moreover, in a transition phase from compulsory conscription to voluntary service and with increasingly pressing intemational obligations due to developments in the terrorist activity of Islamic fundamentalism.
Finally, attention must inevitably focus on the Defense budget, which cannot be separated from the Defense model.
The 2002 Defense budget set by the previous Govemment amounts to 36,837 billion, equal to 1.48% of GDP. But the rate allocated to the "defense function" is 26,460 billion, equal to 1.06% of GDP. If we compare these data with the homogeneous data of other NATO countries, we find negative differences. In fact, France allocates 1.75% to the defense function, England 2.48%, Germany 1.18% but compared to a GDP 70% higher than that of Italy.
It is true that today Armies are no longer evaluated in quantitative terms, much less as sums of men. But the relationship between the Operational Departments and the General Staff is symptomatic, from which we can derive certain imbalances in presence, predominant among the Top Commands, Intermediate Commands and School Bodies, compared to the "operational" ones. Nor does this disharmony diminish when moving on to the Navy and Air Force where the function of the machine prevails over man, yet the intermediate Command structures are not perfectly sized for the complex of Ships and Flight Units.
Imbalances in the use of personnel, overall undercapitalization of the forces, qualitative level of the military instrument lower than the average of our main allies: these appear to be the main handicaps of our Defense which can weigh, and not a little, also on the role and authority of the 'Italy in intemational forums.
We need answers.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it Firstly, the whole staffing sector needs a balancing act and this will be the ____________ first objective of the new Govemment which has also set itself the goal of reducing the transition phase from "conscription" to military "professionalism" so as to be able to conclude by 2004, before the end of the legislature, the formation of fully professionalized Armed Forces in the number of 190,000 men.
12


The book was edited by General Pietro Giannattasio, Head of the Office for Military Policy (office of direct collaboration with the Minister of Defense), who was its inspiration. The structure was modeled on the one adopted in the 1985 volume. The text is based on the material provided by the General Staff for the drafting of the individual parts and is aimed at photographing the existing one on 18 October 2001, therefore it does not indicate the developments subsequent ones.
General Pietro Giannattasio added, upon my directive, his personal assessment of the possible evolutionary lines of defense policy. The essay, contained in the appendix, represents a precious contribution provided by an authoritative expert who simply indicates the topics that may, in the future, constitute the subject of in-depth analysis with the aim of increasing, without prejudice to the organic volumes established by law, the efficiency of the operational units. The White Book will be updated every year with a file containing all the changes that have occurred in the meantime. The Govemment's and my personal gratitude for their efforts goes to General Giannattasio and to those who made this meritorious work possible.
NOTE However, it is undeniable that we are faced with an “unbalanced budget” and the ideal division of It is true that, compared to the 2001 budget, there was an increase of 8.2%, but it is also true that in the distribution of expenses for personnel, for operations and for investment there was an increase for personnel far superior (+11.6%) to those of operations (+3.0%) and investments (+8.0%). The reasons given to justify these differences are all based on the transition from "leverage" to "professionalism" which inevitably causes an increase in costs in this sector.
Ministry of Defense Antonio Martino of the resources (48%) is allocated to staff, 26% to operating expenses and 26% to investments.
Deepening the analysis of the resources that Italy allocates to the "defense function" we find that approximately half Rome, 20 December 2001 ____________ everywhere freedom, law, justice.
The ultimate goal remains to equip Italy with modem and efficient Armed Forces, an operational arm of Italy's policies, to contribute to the best of our ability to build a world where empires Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it In conclusion, with this White Paper, Defense intends to configure the current situation to redefine the "Defense model" and then adapt the reality of the "Defense function" to it, with a prudent use of available resources, aiming to have motivated and trained men, efficient vehicles, 100% stock. From the 2003 budget these will be our guiding principles.
Parliament and the country will be involved in decisions and informed on the actions necessary to achieve the desired results.
The rational solution to the Italian defense problem can only come from the adoption of a defense model well defined a priori and based on real budget availability. It will therefore be necessary to review the current architecture of the Armed Forces in all its military and civil components, eliminate all those intermediate structures between the top and the base for the benefit of the operational forces, also reducing the transition times between the "lever" and the "professionalism"; it is necessary to eliminate everything that does not coincide with the fulfillment of the obligations that come from our main alliances: NATO, EU and UN, establishing the priorities to be satisfied with specific budget items.
Antonio Martino 2/3 to personnel and operations and 1/3 to investments is still a distant goal.
13


1.3.1 Military Political Relations
1.3.2 Disarmament and non-proliferation regimes
- General information - The CFE Treaty - The Vienna Document - The Stability Pact - The Ottawa Convention on the ban on antipersonnel mines - The Convention on the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons - Small Arms And Light Weapons (SALW)
1.3 THE INNOVATIVE PROCESS OF NATIONAL DEFENSE
1.2 THE WORLD FRAMEWORK AND THE SUBJECTS OF INTERNATIONAL POLITICS: UN WEU, EU, NATO, OSCE 1.2.1 General information 1.2.2 The United Nations Organization (UN) Multiple factors of insecurity have appeared on the intemational scene, which have forced a radical rethinking of the defense models of Westem societies, previously focused on the availability of arsenals calibrated to the old typical threat.
1.2.6 The European Union
1.2.6.1 The evolutionary process of European Defense
1.2.6.2 The future developments of European Defense
1.1 EVOLUTION OF THE GEOSTRATEGIC FRAMEWORK AND THE MISSIONS OF THE ARMED
FORCES
1.2.5 The Westem European Union (WEU)
THE SITUATION: FROM THREAT TO RISK After the eclipse of the bipolar order, the enthusiasm and the right and understandable hopes of the first hour have faded, while all the difficulties inherent in the attempt to build a different, freer, more democratic, more respectful intemational order have forcefully emerged. of human rights.
1.2.4 The Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) The end of bipolarism and the Cold War did not create the conditions for the expected stability, instead giving rise to new types of crises.
Before 1989, the East/West opposition presented a threat of clear origin and of a quantitative and qualitative scope that could be defined with appreciable precision. It was a threat limited in its extreme consequences by the deterrence of the nuclear response, possible for both sides. ____________ l Command Structure Review l Force Structure Review l DCI - Defense Capabilities Initiatives , Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
1.1 Evolution of the geostrategic framework and the missions of the Armed Forces The fall of the Berlin Wall and the collapse of the Twin Towers have completely changed the fundamental parameters of the global strategic scenario. The first of those events, twelve years later, can already be framed in a minimum of historical perspective. The second announces a current situation with consequences of extraordinary evolutionary importance.
- The BIOLOGICAL WEAPON CONVENTION – BWC
- The process of “intemal adaptation”
1.2.3.1 The New Strategic Concept of NATO 1.2.3.2 The “new” NATO - The process of “extemal adaptation”
- The Open Skies Treaty
- The NATO High Level Group - The NATO Senior Defense Group on Proliferation (DGP)
1.2.3 The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
PART I 14


But the protection of national security today takes on a broader meaning which includes, in addition to the defense of national sovereignty, the contribution to intemational stability and security, the legitimate safeguarding and protection of our interests as well as the prevention of old and new risks, and the fight against violations of law and peace.
The "missions" of our Armed Forces today are defined within a vast spectrum of operational actions aimed, in compliance with constitutional principles, at the protection of national security, political-territorial integrity, the values of our civilization and well-being and economic and social development.
At the same time, an extraordinary adaptation effort by national and intemational defense organizations has involved the revision of strategic concepts and doctrines, to deal with new threats that have become multifaceted, widespread and multidirectional, and such as to require multidimensional and multinational responses.
The current phase of the Euro-Atlantic security framework is heir to the transformations that occurred within NATO and the EU in the last decade of the last century, a process in which Italy played an important role, contributing to overcoming the old barriers that divided Europe and the updating of the transatlantic link, also combining in a qualified manner the strategic objectives of European integration with those of the consolidation of the Euro-Atlantic spaces.
This new geostrategic phase places European and allied military instruments faced with new operational needs and the need to acquire the flexibility of use necessary to face new missions with continuously variable geometry.
Compared to the old threat, the current risks, but also the challenges and opportunities, are more complex in nature and require broader and more diversified responses. Intemational action, in addition to the traditional political, diplomatic, economic, cultural and cooperation instruments, increasingly makes active use of the military instrument, which has become one of the essential indicators of the credibility and reliability of the country system in the context of intemational relations.
This is how, in the last decade of the last millennium, the Atlantic Alliance was affected by a profound process of reforms. The United States of America have reviewed their strategic priorities, their operational tools, their intemational commitments. The European Union is committed to developing its own common foreign, security and defense policy.
The Mediterranean, with its strong economic imbalances between north and south, its multiple conflicts and tensions, its centrality as a route of economic, civil and military communication, has taken on an increasingly high strategic value. Eastem countries are looking for a place in Europe and in the world, with a strong anchoring in the West and its value system.
The inaction of the European scenario during the Cold War was replaced by a picture of instability and new security risks which pushed Italy, together with its European and Atlantic allies, to substantially rethink and redesign its military policy action .
But the risks transcend national borders. In an increasingly interconnected environment, the "amount of risk" accepted by a nation included in intemational coalitions represents the risk shared by all. ____________ The evolution from that threat to these risks represents a real difference between what was and is today a condition of systemic crisis, which negatively influences the pursuit of the country's vital interests.
Today, security and defense policies find themselves no longer able to limit themselves to the traditional sphere of strictly war capabilities, but also have to deal with a transversal, often subtle and sometimes immaterial enemy.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The new configuration of the global framework therefore requires a continuous and careful re-evaluation, first political and then strategic, of defense priorities also aimed at setting up new military capabilities and new force systems, capable of facing a diversified multiplicity of new risks.
Consequently, support for the intemational community's operational missions has become, particularly in recent years, a characterizing element in the use of our Armed Forces.
It is a multiplicity of asymmetric activities which, variously combined and articulated together, configure those risks that the Intemational Community will have to deal with in the future. Terrorism represents a catalyst and multiplier factor for these risks.
The traditional threat no longer exists, real risks arise which base their capabilities not only on armaments, but also on more diversified and sophisticated tools, such as the movement of money or legitimate and illicit commercial goods, which allow large profits, which can be used for criminal purposes.
Naturally, this concept is increasingly embedded in the action of the large intemational organizations of which we are an active and responsible part, in particular the European Union, the Atlantic Alliance and the United Nations.
The terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001 further upset previous geostrategic structures, projecting new risks onto the intemational scene deriving from possible terrorist actions and organized crime.
15


This policy is coherent and substantiates the commitments undertaken and the role played within the United Nations, the European Union, the Atlantic Alliance and the OSCE, the large intemational organizations on which the security, the foundation of well-being and national cohesion.
Thanks to this significant participation in intemational initiatives, as well as a strong proactive capacity, Italy has acquired a growing global political "weight" and, from a "consumer" country of security, has become a "producer" country of security.
1.2 The global framework and the subjects of intemational politics: UN, WEU, EU, NATO, OSCE This principle of pre-eminence of the UN mandate derives from its universalism which gives it the necessary legitimacy and political authority.
The UN is the first intemational institution of reference for its pre-eminent role in the prevention and political management of crises and in globally addressing new challenges and the increased risk of instability in the various regions of the world.
Italy is characterized, in the intemational context, by a strong presence in Intemational Security and Defense Organizations.
The lines of the national and intemational Security and Defense Policy have demonstrated, in fact, a significant sharing of choices of a "bipartisan" nature and, therefore, more authoritative and credible in the intemational context. synergy of contributions from individual member countries. At the same time, intemational institutions have proven to be only partially capable of managing new crises and conflicts.
This commitment has developed in a context in which the country has recently demonstrated its ability to clearly identify its security interests, strengthening its national identity.
1.2.2 The United Nations (UN) The Italian Armed Forces do not shy away from this challenge, evolving from the predominantly static dimension of the defense of sovereignty, towards dynamic support for the action of the Intemational Community for the prevention and management of crises, and enriching their professionalism, to be disseminated to all the levels, as an indispensable guarantee for dealing with the multiplicity of tasks.
In such a changing geopolitical framework, the large intemational institutions have acquired growing awareness of their role and responsibility in support of peace, within a framework of complementarity and
• development of bilateral relations for common security, both within the bodies mentioned above, but also with those countries that are not part of them, particularly in the Mediterranean area. sources of legitimacy of the initiatives promoted at regional level;
On the other hand, the experience of recent years has clearly demonstrated that the violation of human rights is frequently connected with the violation of people's right to identity and self-determination. ____________ capable of creating a vulnerability to intemational peace and security and cannot leave anyone indifferent.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
• recognition of the UN and the OSCE as bodies representing a global will and therefore
• participation in NATO, an organization that remains the foundation of the continent's collective defense and primary guarantee for the country's security; • participation in the European Union in its role as a regional body for cooperation, development and security in and for Europe, as a European pillar of transatlantic collaboration in the field of security;
The belief that the intemational community has the right and duty to intervene in the intemal affairs of a single State if it is responsible for serious and repeated violations of human rights to the detriment of its citizens has gradually become established. In such cases, the conduct of states appears per se State sovereignty has ceased to be an absolute and indisputable value in the intemational order.
In summary, the principles that govem the national approach towards the various intemational entities are:
1.2.3 The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) But, in the face of this undisputed institutional and moral pre-eminence, the UN does not appear to have a sufficiently effective structure for the direct management of complex crises that involve the use of military force.
1.2.1 General information In this difficult decade animated by armed conflicts, wars and intemational crises that have tragically affected all continents, including Europe, new principles have slowly been established in the Intemational Community in ways that were unthinkable in the old system, even if still insufficient to define a new system of relations between states.
16


Two new tasks have instead been inserted: that of crisis management, to be carried out "case by case and by consensus of individual nations", and that of cooperation with other countries in the Euro-Atlantic area, (partnership) .
The most significant aspect of the New Strategic Concept consisted in the reworking of the tasks (fundamental security tasks): with the confirmation of those relating to security, consultation and deterrence and defense, but with the elimination of that of maintaining strategic balances in Europe, considered no longer current.
1.2.3.1 The New Strategic Concept of NATO The evolutionary process that led to the definition of the New Strategic Concept of NATO, most recently finalized in the Washington Summit (1999), began in the early 1990s with the "Declaration of London", which started a project to adapt the organization's structures to the new security context resulting from the disappearance of the East-West confrontation.
This brings us to Washington (1999), where, essentially, NATO redefines itself as an Organization for the 21st century. of new crisis management and peacekeeping missions.
The transatlantic bond thus remains the foundation of Westem security, in a context of accelerated transformation towards a more balanced and equitable relationship of responsibilities and duties between Europeans and the United States.
The concept of security had to be understood in an even more global way than in the past, including risks of a different nature such as the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their means, the interruption of flows of vital resources, acts of terrorism and sabotage.
The "New Strategic Concept", recognizing the security factor as intimately connected to political, economic and social considerations, based the existence of a collective defense capacity on dialogue and cooperation, to be achieved through collaboration with the new partners of the Central and Eastem Europe.
From a defense organization against the threat from the East, therefore "exclusive", the Alliance has transformed, with a series of intemal and extemal reforms, into a builder of Euro-Atlantic security, capable of projecting, to the East and the South, stability and safety, therefore "inclusive".
Following the definition of the New Strategic Concept, the guidelines were drawn up for: • the review of the political and military structures and procedures of the Alliance; • the reduction of Alliance forces and their response levels, with a restructuring in operation The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the bastion of our national defense during the Cold War, remains the comerstone of our security even today, but in the new forms towards which the Atlantic Alliance is evolving, both in terms of missions and intemal arrangements.
At present, this cooperative form, which makes use of the participation of 27 partner countries, in addition to those of the Alliance, can rightly be considered a fundamental component of security in the Euro-Atlantic area, a truly central moment of NATO policy. •
• reaffirms the willingness to intervene with its own procedures, while respecting the autonomous ones ____________ ability to work together in peacekeeping, crisis management and generally humanitarian tasks.
This initiative consisted of an invitation, open to states participating in the North Atlantic Cooperation Council-NACC (later replaced, in 1997, by the Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council-EAPC), and to other member countries of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe-CSCE (later renamed OSCE), to join NATO countries in a program of practical cooperation, aimed at implementing the Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it decisions of the Member States and in accordance with their respective constitutions. maintenance of intemational peace and security";
At the Brussels summit in January 1994, the Partnership for Peace (PfP) initiative was inaugurated, in its dual function of cooperation instrument, but also of preparation and screening of candidate countries for the eastward enlargement of the Alliance.
The subsequent Rome Summit (1991) created the foundations for a more institutional system of relations with the countries of Central and Eastem Europe, with the establishment of a forum, the North Atlantic Cooperation Council (NACC), which initially involved 9 nations.
Furthermore, the Alliance, in working to achieve its purpose and fulfill its fundamental security tasks: • recognizes the "authority of the United Nations Security Council and the responsibility of the OSCE for the On this occasion, in fact, the "new" NATO saw the light of day.
A third fundamental element was added to the dialogue-deterrence combination, namely cooperation with former adversaries, potential future partners, in search of a new type of relationship that would guarantee the highest possible level of peace and stability in the Eurozone. Atlantic.
17


2 Commands immediately subordinate to SACLANT and located in NORFOLK:
Parallel to NATO's "extemal adaptation", a process of "intemal adaptation" has developed to make the Alliance more effective against new types of threats.
2 Component Commands, one naval and one air, in the Southem European Region, both in Naples; „ 3 Regional Commands (RCs) in the Atlantic (NORFOLK, NORTHWOOD and LISBON);
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The NATO Force Structure Review (NFSR) process was started after the 1999 NATO Summit in Washington, with the aim of ensuring both an adequate reduction Italy has set its policy on full support for the "open door", in particular, supporting the entry of those countries whose membership in NATO could represent the driving force for achieving better goals in the social and economic fields , but at the same time contribute to increasing general safety.
2 Strategic Commands (SCs), SACLANT in the Atlantic (NORFOLK) and SHAPE (MONS) in "
During this Summit, the enlargement of the Atlantic Organization to new countries in Central and Eastem Europe (Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland) was formally launched and the Charter for a specific Partnership with Ukraine was also signed. „ 7 joint Subregional Commands in Europe of which 3 in the Northem Region (HEIDELBERG, KARUP and The mission, number, type and location of the NATO Commands were therefore redefined, moving from a structure on four levels of command (for a total of 65 Headquarters, of which eight on Italian territory) to a more streamlined organization centered on 20 Commands. " n Command of the Atlantic Strategic Fleet (Strikfltlant); n Atlantic Submarine Command (Subaclant).
1.2.3.2 The “new” NATO The process of “extemal adaptation” Multinational (Combined) and Joint (Joint) organized and established to deal with Contingent Operations that require Multinational Command and Control. " ____________ A first response to the need for a functional adaptation of the military structure of the Alliance had already occurred with the creation, in 1993, of the Combined Joint Task Forces (CJTF), Operational Unit (Task Force) The process of “intemal adaptation” Europe;
RAMSTEIN);
2 Component Commands (CCs), one naval and one air, in the Northem European Region (NORTHWOOD and l Review of the structure of the Forces To this end, NATO has established a program of activities to assist aspiring countries, the Membership Action Plan (MAP), which offers aspiring countries a list of activities that can be used to support their preparation for possible entry into the Alliance.
As regards the Southem Region, the Regional Command of CINCSOUTH and the Sub-Regional Commands for the air and naval assets of Naples (COMAIRSOUTH and COMNAVSOUTH) and a Sub-Regional Joint Forces Command in Verona (JHQSOUTH) predominantly terrestrial.
STAVANGER) and 4 in the Southem Region (VERONA, MADRID, LARISSA and IZMIR);
ARTICULATION OF NATO COMMANDS In essence, these are two significant "extemal adaptation" "moves" that start a process that is not yet concluded. Indeed, the "open door" principle underlines that the Alliance could extend future invitations to Nations capable of assuming the responsibilities and obligations of membership.
The key step for the reconfiguration of the Alliance towards extemal countries occurred with the Madrid summit (July 1997), a true tuming point for NATO policy.
This idea, still under development, was incorporated into a more general review process which affected the command structure and that of the forces. l Review of the Command Structure Following the initiatives conceming the intemal adaptation of the Alliance, started with the Strategic Concept of 1991 and materialized in the "Long Term Study", the need for new and updated operational tools emerged, to effectively carry out and credibility of both the traditional defense missions of member countries (operations under art. 5) and the new tasks, with particular reference to non-art. missions. 5 - "Out of Area". " "
2 Regional Commands (RCs) in Europe (BRUNSSUM and NAPLES);
Structure of NATO Commands 18


The OSCE, which descends directly from the Final Act of the Conference on Cooperation and Security in Europe held in Helsinki in 1975, is the organization that includes, in a new framework of pan-European collaboration, all of the 55 countries that were previously adversaries during the Cold War. It is the guarantor of the Treaty "
1.2.4 The Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) Five areas conceming the "priority sectors of intervention" have been identified, listed below:
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it terrestrial, with readiness between 0 – 90 days;
Leveraging the support expressed at the highest political levels, NATO therefore launched a collective stimulus and impetus activity, capable of coagulating synergies and guiding the onerous process of adjustment that Europeans, to varying degrees, had already individually undertaken.
In Command and Control, the protected military communications satellite, SICRAL, was recently launched, which constitutes an essential component for any real and increased capacity in the sector of forces in extemal theaters. "
It is hoped that the strong political determination underlying the initiative, the union of efforts and, last but not least, the comparison with the Partners, can help overcome the financial and bureaucratic hurdles that hinder renewal everywhere.
Necessary Headquarters for NATO Reaction Forces of the size of the Alliance's military instrument, and the satisfaction of new strategic needs. case of an "aggression of large proportions" (operation Art.5); three MCC (Maritime Component Command) or rather HRF (M) HQs.
These general sectors were therefore divided into 59 specific implementation measures, for each of the ____________ terrestrial, with readiness between 90 – 180 days; a certain number of Longer Term Build-up Forces (LTBF) with readiness greater than 365 days, necessary in six Forces at Lower Readiness HQs (FLR (L) HQs), predominantly A high-level political-military working group, High Level Steering Group - HLSG, led by the Secretary General, was established with the task of coordinating activities and presenting concrete results.
As for air and maritime transport, the acquisition of dedicated aircraft and the construction of a major multipurpose naval unit with capacity for air, amphibious and transport operations of men and vehicles, constitute important examples of our growing commitment in this sector.
Italy, considering the initiative to be of priority importance, has started the process of modemizing the Armed Forces towards the objectives of the DCI, favoring the increase in projectability and interoperability. l DCI - Defense Capabilities Initiatives The NATO Defense Capabilities Initiative, launched at the Washington Summit, consists of a wide-ranging initiative, stimulated by the glaring shortcomings highlighted by the Armed Forces of the European Partners during the recent Balkan crises. It is intended to strengthen the "European pillar" of the Alliance through a clear acceleration of the process of modemizing operational capabilities.
The project on the revision of the structure of the Forces is set up in 4 phases. After passing the 1st (the study one) and the 2nd (the offer analysis one, completed with the issuing of the "Phase 2 Final Report", March 2001, with the acceptance of all the valid HRF/ FRL (L) HQs, the HRF (M) HQs under the new Graduated Readiness HQ formula), has now entered the 3rd phase. Finally, the actual implementation of the new structures will follow (4th and final phase).
The capability sectors in which the shortcomings appear most glaring at a strategic level are Force Command and Control (including the lack of airport radar), Intelligence and Strategic Transport (both air and maritime). " three High Readiness Forces (L) HQs (HRF (L) HQs) (High Operational Readiness Commands), predominantly With this in mind, it was decided to abandon the traditional "mission oriented" structure to move to a "capability oriented" device. " which solutions are studied, costs are assessed and progress is monitored.
- mobility and riskability; - logistical sustainability;
- effective engagement capacity;
- survival of forces and infrastructure; - command and control.
19


Both of these steps require European countries to face a process of renewal and adaptation which requires them to assimilate and develop a safety culture that is essential for managing new scenarios.
The inclusion of the Petersberg missions in the Treaty of Amsterdam created the conditions for the decision of the 1999 Cologne European Summit to bring elements of the WEU into the European Union. At the same time, the evolution of the transatlantic relationship has favored the emergence of the European Security and Defense Identity (ESDI).
Italy participates in OSCE operations by sending numerous experts and with a financial contribution to long-term missions, exceeding 10% of the total.
The CFE Treaty, the Code of Conduct, the Vienna Document 1999, the charter for European Security, the management of disarmament agreements in the former Yugoslavia, the study of new confidence and security measures (CSBMs) are some of the tools concrete measures with which the OSCE develops its activity.
In 1997, the European Union, which in the meantime had established itself in the economic dimension and strengthened in the political one, began to establish itself as a new actor in the security of the continent also thanks to the launch of the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership (Barcelona, 1995).
Such progress has paved the way for the development of the EU in the field of Defense and Security, according to a criterion of hereditary continuation between the two institutions.
For twenty years, the OSCE has played an important role in preventive diplomacy and in the in-depth resolution of conflict causes, operating mainly in sectors relating to civil coexistence, such as the control of the democracy of electoral and political-institutional, humanitarian and social processes, the prevention of conflicts or the re-establishment of normal post-conflict conditions.
Even if the operational role of the organization was not considered "decisive", the WEU can be credited with achieving important goals such as the creation of common structures in the analysis of satellite intelligence, the development of a European security concept, the management of the first operations with intemational police forces and the creation of "European multinational forces".
CFE (Conventional Forces in Europe), signed in 1990 by the countries belonging to NATO and those of the Warsaw Pact, which represents the comerstone of conventional disarmament on the continent. ____________ This entailed a redefinition of the WEU, envisaging its development "as a defense component of the European Union and as an instrument to strengthen the European pillar of the Atlantic Alliance". Ultimately, for the WEU, it was configured as a real role as a “hinge” between NATO and the EU.
The creation of the European Union in November 1993 and the entry into force of the Maastricht Treaty subsequently led to the development of the "Common Foreign and Security Policy" (CFSP). It has been defined as the “defence of common values, fundamental interests and the independence of the Union; in maintaining peace and strengthening intemational security according to the principles of the United Nations Charter; in the development and consolidation of democracy and the rule of law and in the definition of a common defense policy, which could subsequently lead to a common defense".
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it European Defense fits into both the context of the Atlantic Alliance and that of the European Union. For the first area, the reference framework is constituted by the decisions taken at the Atlantic Council in Berlin (3 June 1996) where support for the development of a European Security and Defense Identity was agreed This objective requires the availability of adequate operational capabilities to support policies to expand the framework of security, democracy and stability beyond the current borders of the Union. An expansion, which is fully within the interests of a highly industrialized country like Italy, for which the freedom and security of commercial and economic exchanges constitute a vital interest.
The definition of the WEU's role had a significant evolution in June 1992, when the so-called "Petersberg Declaration" was drawn up, which entrusted it with the use of the Armed Forces of European Nations for tasks, known as "Petersberg missions", including humanitarian, peacekeeping and crisis management activities.
Europe's evolutionary process in the security and defense sector has primarily involved the Westem European Union, the oldest post-war European defense institution.
1.2.6. The European Union
1.2.6.1 The evolutionary process of European Defense From the initial Treaty of Rome (25 March 1957) to today, the European Union has been able to create an economic community and values. Now, moving towards progressive political integration, the Security and Defense Dimension plays an essential role and constitutes a very powerful driver of integration and a driving force capable of supporting a common foreign policy for the future Europe.
1.2.5 The Westem European Union (WEU) 20


• Atlantica, avoiding unnecessary duplication; of the CFSP is compatible with the common concept of "Security and Defense Policy" and it was agreed to define and adopt the necessary provisions, respecting the needs of NATO operations and the cohesion of its command
structure, for:
The determination to carry out the Petersberg tasks will require Member States to improve national and multinational military capabilities, which will simultaneously strengthen, where appropriate, NATO capabilities and increase the effectiveness of Partnership for Peace (PfP) in promoting security European."
Principles for cooperation with third European NATO member countries and other European partners in military crisis management under EU leadership will be agreed, without prejudice to the autonomy of EU decision-making processes.
At the Washington Summit, on the 50th anniversary of NATO, (24 April 1999) it was reiterated that the development Petersberg, based on appropriate decision-making structures and making use of effective military means within NATO or national or multinational means outside the NATO structure; the desire to further develop these structures and capabilities in complementarity with the Alliance
• the desire of European nations to strengthen their operational capabilities to carry out such missions For the second, the reference framework is represented by the Treaty of Amsterdam (2 October 1997) which established that the defense dimension is an integral part of the Union's action and of its Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP).
New political and military bodies will be established within the Council to enable the Union to take decisions on EU-led Petersberg operations and to ensure, under the authority of the Council, the necessary political control and strategic direction of those operations. (ESDI) within the Alliance through the strengthening of a European pillar of NATO and the development of "separable but not separate military capabilities".
Along the same lines, at the WEU Ministerial Council in Bremen (10-11 May 1999), the following were reconfirmed:
In particular, the following was agreed in Helsinki: "A common European Headline Goal for readily deployable military capabilities will be defined and targets for collective capabilities in the areas of command and control, information and transport will be rapidly developed strategic, to be achieved through coordinated national and multinational efforts, on a voluntary basis, to carry out the full range of Petersberg tasks.
Italy, among the founding countries of the European construction process, must play a role commensurate with its political and economic potential. The increasingly incisive participation in European and Atlantic bodies must therefore be accompanied by a coherent national policy, to give concrete implementation to the choices that will gradually be taken within the EU. ____________ fully availability of forces for EU-led operations. identified for use in EU-led operations; • identify a range of European command options for EU-led operations; • further adapt NATO's defense planning system to incorporate more Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it At the Helsinki European Council (10-11 December 1999) the Union set itself the objective of having a capacity for autonomous action, supported by credible military forces and an adequate decision-making process. Its Member States are committed to further developing a policy that will enable them to equip themselves with an efficient institutional structure to direct it, effective military capabilities to manage it, adequate financial resources to implement it and a competitive and technologically advanced defense industrial base. advanced to support it.
The decisions of the Cologne European Council (3-4 June 1999) on European defense established, in June 1999, the lines to make it possible for the European Union to fully carry out its intemational role, giving it military capabilities in support of the CFSP within the framework of the peace missions (so-called Petersberg missions) and underlining that the Union's action in the field of defense takes place "in accordance with the principles of the UN charter".
• foresee the availability for the EU of joint NATO capabilities and assets in advance planning of EU-led operations;
• the need for the WEU to be operationally effective through the involvement and participation of all WEU countries, depending on their “status” and to continue cooperation with the EU and NATO.
• ensure EU access to NATO planning capabilities that can contribute to 21


provide smaller formations, willing to mobilize in a very short time for rapid intervention situations. Member States must be able to sustain this deployment for at least one year, which will require an additional pool of deployable units (and support elements) with less rapid availability to replace the initial forces."
The day after the Forces Commitment Conference, the Nice European Council took place (7-8-9 December 2000) which took a whole series of important political decisions for the continuation of the CFSP plan. These Military General Staff;
Furthermore, the Fifteen have set the objective of having, by 2003, on the basis of voluntary contributions from member states, 5000 police units to be allocated to intemational missions with a rapid deployment capacity of 1000 men in thirty days. With reference to the possible transition period between an initial military command and a subsequent civilian direction, the line of establishing robust, rapidly deployable, flexible and interoperable Integrated Police Units of the European Union was approved, as well as the possibility of cooperation in this specific field between a small number of Member States. At Feira it was also clarified that the European contribution to civilian crisis management can be expressed in response to requests from leading organizations such as the United Nations or the OSCE or through actions conducted independently by the European Union itself.
• the launch of a civilian dimension of crisis management, through the creation of a rapid police intervention force of 5000 men, of which 1000 can be deployed within 30 days (in this regard The primary objective, "Headline Goal", formulated at the Helsinki summit, necessary to develop European
capabilities can be stated as follows: "by 2003, thanks to voluntary cooperation, the European Union must be able to rapidly deploy and maintain forces capable of carrying out the full Petersberg tasks in accordance with the Treaty of Amsterdam, including the most ambitious, in operations at corps level (up to 15 brigades, i.e. 50,000-60,000 men). Such forces shall be militarily autonomous and equipped with the appropriate command, control and information capabilities, as well as logistics, other war support units and, if necessary, also air and naval support elements. Member States will need to be able to organize a full deployment at this level within 60 days, and in this context they will need to be able to decisions concem: • the formalization of the permanent structures: Political and Security Committee, Military Committee and At the Feira summit, the principles and modalities of the agreements were also defined to allow the European members of NATO, which are not part of the EU, and the other candidate countries for membership, to contribute to the military management of crises led by the 'EU. Furthermore, the principles of consultation with NATO on military issues were defined and the following four priority areas towards which the EU will develop its relations with NATO were identified: • security issues; • capacity objectives;
• ways to allow the EU to access NATO assets; • definition of permanent consultation mechanisms. ____________ The Forces Commitment Conference (20 and 21 November 2000) in Brussels represented a further, significant step forward in the construction of a European Security and Defense Dimension.
At the European Council of S. Maria di Feira (19-20 June 2000) it was decided to organize a capabilities commitment conference, with the intention of moving from a political objective to a precise military assessment of needs, on the basis of which each State can determine their participation in the collective effort and from which the Fifteen will together identify the unsatisfied needs and the relative means to satisfy them.
The subsequent European Council in Lisbon (22 May 2000) established a Committee with specific competence for the civil aspects of crisis management and for the related strengthening and use of non-military instruments.
Consistent with these determinations, Italy - which attributes particular importance to the EU initiative - has offered a qualified conceptual contribution in the various sectors of intervention (police, civil protection, humanitarian aid, activities for the reconstruction of institutions, electoral observers, administrative experts, etc.).
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The catalog also deals with collective capabilities, called "key capabilities" which bring together the sectors of intelligence, strategic transport, "command and control". These capabilities are the subject of bilateral or multilateral partnerships within the EU and which go to complete the land, naval and air capabilities in which the Fifteen have committed to participate.
22


In Nice, a concept for the use of European police forces was developed, including both civil and military police forces, according to two scenarios: the first, which aims to strengthen local police capacities with training missions, assistance, control and consultancy; the second - which corresponds to complex crises - involves the use of EU police forces to replace local police forces to carry out missions aimed at re-establishing public security. ____________ The definitive structure of the new institutional bodies created to manage this policy provides for an important role for the Political Security Committee (PSC). It will be essential that this Committee has the capacity to become a steering body for crisis management and to establish effective interactions with the North Atlantic Council, thus ensuring a reliable and transparent relationship between the Union and the Alliance.
In particular, the start was made for the establishment of permanent bodies responsible for carrying out, under the impetus of the High Representative for Foreign and Security Policy, a more active and responsible role in the field of security and crisis management . They are: the permanent Political and Security Committee (PSC) , based in Brussels, composed of national representatives at senior official/ambassador level. It is the forum for dealing with all matters relating to the CFSP. In the case of military crisis management operations, the CPS will have to ensure, under the authority of the Council, the political control and strategic direction of the operations; the Military Committee (CM), composed of the Chiefs of Defense Staff, represented by their military delegates. It is the forum for providing military advice and recommendations to the CPS, as well as ensuring the military direction of the General Staff. The President of the CM will participate in Council meetings when decisions with Defense implications must be made; the General Staff (MS), operating within the Council, to provide military advice and support to the CFSP, including the execution of military crisis management operations under EU leadership. The General Staff will ensure early waming, situation assessment and strategic planning within the Petersberg missions, including the identification of national and multinational European forces to EU membership and European countries that are part of NATO but not the EU).
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The first of the main components of the process of building a Common European Security and Defense Policy is the institutional management.
With reference to the particular implications inherent in decisions relating to the use of military force, the institutional direction for Europe will have to be able to combine the unity of the overall framework of the Union with the specificity of security and defense policy compared to other policies community.
• the definition of permanent consultation methods between the European Union and NATO; • the integration of the WEU's own functions into the EU; • agreements on the methods of consultation and participation of potential partners (candidate countries There is a very high degree of political sharing, on the part of everyone, of the project for the creation of effective European military capabilities, linked and coherent with those of NATO, even of those countries traditionally considered more prudent by nature. With reference to the initial objective set in Helsinki, a "Catalogue of Capabilities" has been prepared necessary to deal with all types of crisis management missions, from those of a strictly humanitarian type, to the more demanding maintenance or imposition of peace.
In defining these capabilities - both quantitatively and qualitatively - the document outlines a coherent connection with the Defense Capabilities Initiative (DCI), decided by the Alliance at the Washington summit in 1999.
1.2.6.2 Future developments of European Defense The Union, in implementing a European Security and Defense Policy, faces a great integration challenge, equal in complexity and scope to that of the euro. Just as the euro is fully inserted into the global economy, so the European Security and Defense policy must be firmly interconnected with the security policy of the Atlantic Alliance: two sides of the same coin, distinct but not separate, under penalty of loss of effectiveness and of value of our own security and therefore of the process of European political integration. the Carabinieri contributes approximately 800 men, placing it first among all European nations);
The second component of the process concems the reform of military instruments. For them there is a need for an organizational and doctrinal transformation and in the use of men and means. A transformation that requires a leap in quality consistent with Helsinki's ambitious yet realistic objective, i.e. the achievement of an adequate operational capacity by 2003.
23


The sectors in which to invest with greater determination have been identified as interoperability, in the availability of forces that can be projected on a professional basis, in strategic mobility, in Command and Control, in Communication, in Surveillance and Intelligence, in precision engagement, in self-protection and the ability to operate in risky environments due to the phenomenon of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Among these, the incidence of military spending compared to GDP, the ratio between investment expenditure and operating expenditure; the percentage of spending dedicated to research and development; levels of military spending per capita; the quantity of professional forces available compared to the size of the population.
These are all indicators for which today there is a strong lack of homogeneity among Europeans, even one to five, and for which convergence paths should be outlined that would facilitate the contribution of each European country to achieving the common objective of an increased European military capacity . Adopting convergence criteria for military spending, albeit in a flexible and not rigidly prescriptive way, as was the case with the single currency, would greatly facilitate the process of creating an effective European Security and Defense Policy.
The convergence between the operational objectives outlined in the European Defense Initiative and in the "Defense Capability Initiative" of the Atlantic Alliance ensures the integration of one into the other, according to the concept of "separable but not separate forces".
In this sense, the convergence of European defense policies is a necessity to meet the modemization objectives both within NATO and Europe. In this context, after having defined, as a premise, a homogeneous picture of current European military spending, it could be appropriate and effective to indicate lines of progressive approach by European countries to some qualitative standards of military spending, identifying some indicators that outline objectives of convergence.
These shortcomings have repercussions both on the process of building European Defense and on the European capabilities available to the Alliance. In filling these shortcomings - as is necessary - each national contribution will therefore take on a double value: on the European side and on the Atlantic side, thus outlining a connection between the two areas, that of the Union and that of the Alliance.
This "gap", between the required capabilities, defined in the Helsinki Catalogue, and those that Europeans are able to make available to the Union today, constitutes the challenge to make the Union's extemal action more credible, providing it with effective decision-making and operational capabilities.
European spending must certainly be optimized in all sectors, but it must also be increased in investments and advanced technologies. The convergence process must direct us towards reducing the common factor costs present in each of our military instruments, the so-called "overheads", by concentrating and rationalizing the management structures in support of the operational forces, and progressively integrating military demand, both in terms of operational requirements and acquisition processes.
However, in defining national contributions to the common European objective, the shortcomings of operational capabilities of European countries have emerged.
The simple reductive restructuring, although necessary and ongoing, of the quantity of forces of European countries, is not sufficient to modemize European military instruments to reduce the operational gap mentioned above.
The military gap between Europe and the United States is such that it reflects on the real ability to decide and operate together; in essence, the split in military capabilities risks tuming into an operational and political split between the United States and Europe, which puts European security at risk. ____________ They represent only 10 – 15% of US capabilities. It is easy to see how the cost of the lack of European convergence is equal to 50% of the missing capabilities. To this assessment we can add the estimate made by NATO military authorities, according to which the cost of the operational gap between the United States and EU countries would amount to around
30 billion dollars. These estimates, although questionable in absolute terms, are indicative of a real, "political" as well as operational phenomenon.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it European countries as a whole allocate around 60% of US military spending to defence, while the Europeans' operational and projection capabilities are far from having a value proportional to it.
1.3 Innovative process of National Defense 1.3.1 Political-Military Relations The construction of European Defense cannot ignore the problem of adequate resources. The effectiveness of military spending represents the third component of the process of building the European Security and Defense Policy.
It is from this perspective that the discussion and appropriate decision-making processes on the concept of convergence criteria for European Defense must be promoted in European institutional settings.
24


The network of intemational relations in which Defense participates is completed by the activity of qualified support to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in the different negotiating forums for disarmament and non-proliferation (UN, OSCE, EU, NATO, Geneva Conference on Disarmament) and by active and direct implementation of the Treaties and Conventions ratified by Italy (CIVA).
The Vienna Document, signed by the 54 OSCE countries (55 with the readmission of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia), introduces confidence and security measures including the exchange of information, notification of unusual military activities, inspection and observation visits, military contacts. Its first draft was in 1990. It was followed by three other versions, the last of which was in 1999.
The Dayton Agreements provided for stabilization measures in the former Yugoslav area in general and Bosnian in particular. In Annex IB, the two articles, II and IV, of a predominantly military nature, tended to reconcile the various Bosnian components and to rebuild trust between the states involved (Croatia, Serbia and the Entity of Bosnia-Herzegovina). Article V, of an eminently political nature, completed the stabilization process involving not only all the countries in the area but, on a voluntary basis, also extemal nations.
Generality.
1.3.2. Disarmament and non-proliferation regimes The ratification of the adopted Agreement, currently carried out only by Belarus and Ukraine, was subordinated by all Westem countries to full compliance by Moscow with the limits set by the current treaty, exceeded as a result of the Chechen crisis, and with the commitments to withdraw from Georgia and Moldova.
The link between foreign policy and defense policy has consequently become very close.
Of note are the bilateral agreements on the withdrawal of Russian forces from Georgia and Moldova, the full implementation of which, costly in terms of financial and technological resources, requires the support of Westem nations.
In the new intemational framework, exposed to profound geo-strategic transformations, defense policies have become a factor of primary importance, increasingly called upon to make their contribution and in any case to be crucial for the definition of new intemational relations.
As a corollary to the text of the agreement, various nations have signed political commitments of various kinds. ____________ The CFE Treaty, signed in 1990 by NATO and Warsaw Pact countries, establishes the maximum quantity of armaments of five categories (tanks, armored vehicles, artillery, fighter planes and attack helicopters) that each group of States Parties can possess.
On Nov. 19. 1999, at the OSCE Summit in ISTANBUL, the CFE States Parties signed a new text of the convention adapted to the new geo-strategic reality, eliminating the structure of opposing blocs and establishing specific limits for each State Party.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it This is due to the fact that, despite the positive evolution of the strategic context and the high improbability of a large-scale conventional aggression directed against the Alliance, the possibility of the emergence of such a long-term threat persists.
Lowering levels of armaments and verification measures resulting from arms control and non-proliferation agreements support NATO's political and military efforts to achieve strategic objectives. Among these, the strengthening of stability on the European continent, made possible by the CFE Treaty, the substantial reductions in nuclear weapons made possible by the START treaties, the signing of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT), the automatic and unconditional renewal of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), the entry into force of the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), the aforementioned Ottawa Convention on the Ban of Anti-Personnel Mines and other Confidence-Security Measures (CSBMs) developed by 'OSCEs which, despite being only politically binding, contribute to détente in crisis areas.
The Stability Pact for South-Eastem Europe, signed by the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of numerous States, including Italy, and representatives of various intemational organisations, pursues the aim of defining the strategy of interventions in Europe of the South-East, create synergies between initiatives launched by anyone and in any context and ensure added political value to the actions undertaken. It operates through a regional discussion table and three thematic
tables relating, respectively, to high Democratization and Human Rights, to Economic Reconstruction, Development and Cooperation and to Security. In the latter, Defense directly follows projects relating to arms control, non-proliferation, military contacts and control of small arms. Two officers expert in arms control constitute the national contribution to a Regional Arms Control Verification and Implementation Assistance Center (RACVIAC), established in Zagreb.
25


The term "chemical weapons", in fact, refers to the products listed in the text of the Convention in any form or packaging. It is therefore not just about weapons in the traditional sense.
In order to contain costs and optimize available resources, ten nations, including Italy, have joined forces to develop a common observation system called "Pod System". This system consists of a removable extemal container containing the sensors and some consoles to be mounted on board the C130 H aircraft.
While awaiting the entry into force of the Treaty, Italy, like other countries, conducted a series of test flights (bilateral and multilateral) with both Westem and Eastem European countries.
The convention on the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, ratified by the Italian Parliament with Law No. 496 of 18
November 1995 and which came into force in April 1997, extends its effectiveness not only to the Defense structures, but to the broader national context of civil industry. In prohibiting the development, production, purchase, conservation, possession, transfer and use of chemical weapons and imposing their destruction and any production facilities, it also represents a non-proliferation treaty.
The Treaty assigns to all participants the right to carry out observation flights on the territories of any other member state and the duty to accept observation flights on their territories in accordance with the modalities established by the treaty itself.
Furthermore, in accordance with the provisions of the same Convention, Defense contributes, in collaboration with the MAE, to supporting demining and stockpile destruction activities in the countries most at risk. An Italian officer is present in the mission that the WEU, with EU funding, has arranged for Croatia (WEUDAM).
The destruction of the mines in storage is still underway and their complete elimination is expected by 2002.
The Open Skies Treaty, aimed at promoting greater openness and transparency through measures aimed at strengthening trust and security in military activities, provides for the overflight of the States Parties (from Vancouver to Vladivostok) with an aircraft equipped with sensors. Signed in 1992 by the CFE themselves (NATO and ex-Warsaw Pact), it will come into force on 1 January 2002.
The Ottawa Convention on the ban on anti-personnel mines, of December 1997, was in fact anticipated by Italy both with the decision of the Council of Ministers of 13 June 1997 (ban on production, export, storage and use) and with the subsequent law n. 374 of 29 October 1997.
In particular, the Defense will be able to provide its contribution of expertise, or in the context of Peace Operations, in confiscation/seizure activities, reduction and security of deposits.
Italy's support for regional initiatives led by the OSCE and the EU also increases the transparency and coherence measures that our country has long adopted regarding armaments.
Regarding Small Arms And Light Weapons (SALW), the interest aroused by the United Nations General Conference on the illicit trafficking of weapons in all its aspects suggests a possible evolution towards initiatives similar to those adopted for anti-personnel mines. In this regard, as far as the legislation on the production, export and import control of SALW is concemed, it is certainly at the forefront. ____________ Furthermore, Italy participates in the work of the: -NATO High Level Group, which deals with issues relating to NATO policy and planning in the nuclear sector and issues related to the safeguarding and security of nuclear weapons.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
• Periodic declarations relating to the destruction of old chemical weapons (OCW) and abandoned chemical weapons (ACW), the only ones in Defense possession; • the declaration of any findings of residues in subsequent periods; • the destruction of existing stocks.
This Convention does not have a system for verifying and controlling the prohibitions imposed. A Protocol to strengthen the Convention, under discussion at the Geneva Conference on Disarmament, was not approved.
As regards Defence, the obligations deriving from the Convention concem:
The Convention on the Ban of Biological Weapons (BIOLOGICAL WEAPON CONVENTION - BWC), of April 1972, now has 138 States Parties, including Italy. To these will be added 18 which have the ratification procedure underway. The Biological Convention also includes programs for the monitoring and control of a certain number of biological agents and toxins (and related activities), which have the potential to be used in biological warfare, but which at the same time they have legitimate commercial use (dual use).
26


NATO Senior Defense Group on Proliferation DGP which defines NATO policy lines regarding defense and the military dimension of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD).
• Serves as a repository of information on existing civil response programs in allied nations regarding WMD; • Improves existing programs aimed at raising military response capability to operate in a for increasing trust, security and transparency with Russia, currently under discussion in the NATO-Russia Joint Permanent Council.
In this perspective, the WMDC among other things:
In response to the ministerial mandate of the 1999 Washington Summit, specific measures were developed With a decision taken by the NATO summit in Washington on 1 May 2000, the Center on Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMDC) was established at the Intemational Secretariat to focus attention on emerging risks and coordinate the activities of the various bodies of the NATO interested in proliferation, thus strengthening political consultations relating to counter-proliferation activities and increasing the defense and preparedness capacity of allied forces also aimed at protecting civilian populations. ____________ WMD context and to counter the threats posed by them.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it 27


extemal.
• Periodic declarations relating to the destruction of old chemical weapons (OCW) and weapons Regarding Small Arms And Light Weapons (§ALW), the interest arouses - General Conference of the Nations The convention on the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, ratified by the Italian Parliament with Law No. 496 of 18 November
1995 and which came into force in April 1997, extends its effectiveness not only to the Defense structures, but to the broader national context of civil industry. In prohibiting the development, production, purchase, conservation, possession, transfer and use of chemical weapons and imposing their destruction and any production facilities, it also represents a non-proliferation treaty. united on the illicit trafficking of weapons JOi aspects, gives a glimpse of a possible evolution towards those The Dayton Agreements provided for stabilization measures in the former Yugoslav area in general and Bosnian in particular.
In Annex I B, the two articles, II and IV, of a predominantly military nature. they tended to reconcile the various Bosnian components and to rebuild trust between the states involved (Croatia, Serbia and the Entity of Bosnia-Herzegovina). Article V, of an eminently political nature, completed the stabilization process by involving not only all the countries in the area but, on a voluntary basis, also nations abandoned chemicals (ACW), the only ones in Defense possession; • the declaration of any findings of residues in subsequent periods; • the destruction of existing stocks.
The destruction of the mines in storage is still underway and its complete elimination is expected by 2002. Furthermore, in accordance with the provisions of the same Convention, the Defense contributes, in collaboration with the MAE, to the support of mine clearance and destruction activities of the stocks in the countries most at risk. An Italian officer is present in the mission that the WEU, with EU funding, has arranged for Croatia (WEU-DAM). ____________ As regards Defence, the obligations deriving from the Convention concem: -The Ottawa Convention on the ban on anti-personnel mines, of December 1997, was in fact anticipated by Italy both with the decision of the Council of Ministers of 13 June 1997 (ban on production, export, storage and use) and with the subsequent Law no. 374 of 29 October 1997.
The Stability Pact. for South-Eastem Europe, signed by the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of numerous States, including Italy, and representatives of various intemational organisations, pursues the aim of defining the strategy of interventions in South-Eastem Europe, create. synergies between initiatives launched by anyone and in any context and ensure added political value to the actions undertaken. It operates through a regional discussion table and three thematic tables relating, respectively, to high Democratization and Human Rights, to Economic Reconstruction, Development and Cooperation and to Security. In the latter, Defense directly follows the projects relating to arms control, non-proliferation, military contacts and control of small arms. Two officers expert in arms control constitute the national contribution to a Regional Arms Control Verification and Implementation Assistance Center (RACVIAC), established in Zagreb.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The term "chemical weapons", in fact, refers to the products listed in the text of the Convention in any form or packaging.
It is therefore not just about weapons in the traditional sense.
28


.Open Skies, aimed at promoting greater openness and transthrough measures aimed at building confidence and -The Convention on the Ban of Bioweapons (BIOLOGICAL WEAPON CONVENTION -BWC), of April 1972, now has 138 States Parties, including Italy. To these will be added 18 which have the ratification procedure underway. Within the scope of the Biological Convention, programs are also envisaged for the monitoring and control of a certain number of brological agents and toxins (and activities related to them), which have the potential to be used in biological warfare1 but which at the same time have legitimate commercial use (dual use).
This Convention does not have a system for verifying and controlling the prohibitions imposed. A Protocol to strengthen the Convention, under discussion at the Geneva Conference on Disarmament! was not approved.
Ilare Defense will be able to provide its contribution of expertise, either in the context of Peace Operations, in conflict, reduction and security activities of depots.
10 of Italy to the regional initiatives conducted by the OSCE and the EU, furthermore, to increase the transparency and coherence measures that the country has long adopted in relation to armaments.
31 import control of SALW, is certainly cutting edge. multilateral) both with Ln countries and with Eastem European countries. adopted for anti-personnel mines. With regard, therefore, to the legislation on production, export, With the entry into force of the Treaty Italy1 like other countries, has con-I series of test flights {bilateral and -NATO Senior Defense Group on Proliferation DGP which defines the NATO policy lines regarding defense and the military dimension of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD). ____________ Signed in 1992 by the CFE {NATO and ex-Warsaw Pact), it will come into force on 1st January, assigns to all participants the right to carry out observation flights in the territories of any other member state and the duty to accept observation on their territories in accordance with the modalities established by the text. or to contain costs and optimize available resources, ten companies in Italy have joined forces to develop a communication system called "Pod System".
This system consists of a removable extemal lithium containing the sensors and some to be mounted on board the C130 H aircraft. for increasing trust, security and transparency with Russia, currently under discussion in the NATO-Russia Joint Permanent Council.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it military entities, involves the overflight of the States Parties (from Vancouver to JK) with an aircraft equipped with sensors.
In response to the ministerial mandate of the 1999 Washington Summit, specific measures were developed the security Furthermore, Italy participates in the work of the: -High Level Group of NATO, which deals with issues relating to NATO's policy and planning in the nuclear sector and issues related to the safeguarding and security of nuclear weapons.
29


____________ Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it With a decision taken by the NATO summit in Washington on 1 May 2000, the Center on Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMDC) was established at the Intemational Secretariat to focus attention on emerging risks and coordinate the activities of the various bodies of NATO interested in proliferation, thus strengthening political consultations relating to counter-proliferation activities and increasing the defense and preparedness capacity of Air Forces also aimed at protecting civilian populations.
With this in mind, the WMDC! among other things: .serves as a repository of information on existing civil response programs in allied nations regarding WMD; .improves existing programs aimed at increasing military reaction capacity to operate in a WMD context and to counter the threats posed by them.
30


2.3.2.2 General Directorate for Civilian Personnel (PERSOCIV)
2.3.2.10 General Directorate of Military Health (DIFESAN)
2.3.3 The Central Offices
2.3 THE DEFENSE ORDER 2.3.1 The Defense General Staff 2.3.2 The General Secretariat of Defense 2.3.2.1 General Directorate for Military Personnel (PERSOMIL)
2.3.2.9 General Directorate of Works and State Property (GENIODIFE)
2.2 THE RESTRUCTURING OF THE ARMED FORCES 2.2.1 Legislative legislation 2.2.2 The succession of legislative decrees 2.2.3 The Chief of Staff of
Defense 2.2.4 The Secretary General of Defense
2.2.5 The Chiefs of Staff of the Armed Forces
2.2 .6 The General Commander of the Carabinieri 2.2.7 The Committee of Chiefs of Staff 2.2.8 Security: 2.2.8.1 The SISMI
2.2.8.2 The RIS (Information and Security Department)
2.1.5.1 The Undersecretaries of State
2.3.2.8 General Directorate of the Commissariat and General Services
(COMMISERVIZI)
PART II
DEFENSE 2.1 THE LINE OF COMMAND 2.1.1 The Head of State 2.1.2 The Supreme Defense Council 2.1.3 The
Parliament 2.1.4 The President of the Council of Ministers 2.1.5 The Minister of Defense
2.3.2.7 Directorate General of Telecommunications, Information Technology and Advanced Technologies (TELEDIFE)
2.3.5.1 The General Organization and the General Staff 2.3.5.2 The Organization of the Operational Forces 2.3.5.3 The Peripheral/Territorial Organization 2.3.6 The Air Force
2.3.6.1 The new Air Force 2.3.6.2 The General Staff of 'Aeronautics 2.3.6.3 Structural Aspects 2.3.7 The Carabinieri 2.3.7.1 Restructuring
2.3.2.6 General Directorate of Aeronautical Armaments (ARMAEREO) ____________
2.3.2.5 General Directorate of Naval Armaments (NAVARM)
2.3.4 The Army
2.3.4.1 Army General Staff 2.3.4.2 The Operational Organization 2.3.4.3 The Educational and Training Organization 2.3.4.4 The Logistics
Organization 2.3.4.5 The Territorial
Organization 2.3.4.6 The Inspectorate of
Infrastructure 2.3.4.7 The Inspectorate for Recruitment and Completion Forces 2.3.5 The Navy Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
2.3.2.4 General Directorate of Land Armaments (TERRARM)
2.3.3.2 Central Office for Administrative Inspections (ISPEDIFE)
2.3.2.3 General Directorate of Conscription, Compulsory Recruitment, Militarization, Civil Mobilization and Auxiliary Corps (LEVADIFE)
2.3.3.1 Central Office of Budget and Financial Affairs (BILANDIFE) 31


2.1 The line of command
2.1.1 The Head of State The Constitution (art. 87), as regards Defence, attributes the following powers to the President of the Republic: the Command of the Armed Forces; • the presidency of the Supreme Defense Council; • the declaration of the state of war decided by the Chambers.
In particular, the provision of the aforementioned L. n. 25/1997 that govemment resolutions on security and defense must be examined by the Supreme Defense Council and approved by Parliament means that the President of the Republic exercises further control over the delicate matter.
Furthermore, this appears to be in accordance with the composition of the body in which the Ministers responsible for strategic sectors of the Nation participate.
2.4.1 Introduction
2.4.2 The missions
2.4.2.1 Management of intemational crises
2.4.2.2 Multinational formations with Italian participation 2.4.2.3 Italian participation in the new structure of NATO forces 2.4.2.4 The Italian contribution to European defense
2.4 The definition of “missions” In fact, the Supreme Defense Council is the place in which, even in times of crisis, timely and in-depth information is provided to the President of the Republic on govemment choices regarding defense to allow him the most rapid and balanced function of guaranteeing compliance of the ends, means (in particular of the military instrument) and limits established by the Constitution, in order to ensure the ultimate subjection of the Armed Forces to the supreme political institutions of the Republic, guaranteeing their political neutrality and ensuring their use in the exclusive service of the Nation .
2.3.7.6 The Barracks
2.3.7.7 The Training Organization 2.3.7.8 The Territorial Organization 2.3.7.9 The Mobile and Special Organization 2.3.7.10 Departments for specific needs 2.3.7.11 Departments for the central bodies
2.3.7.12 Staff for the tasks military Subsequently, law no. 25/1997 expanded the competences of the Council by attributing to it the examination of fundamental decisions in matters of national security and strengthened its nature as a means of connection between constitutional bodies in which security issues can be addressed and addressed.
2.3.7.2 The military tasks
2.3.7.3 The structure
2.3.7.4 The General Command
2.3.7.5 Administrative Technical and Logistical Groupings (RTLA) The law establishing the Supreme Defense Council n. 624/1950 attributes to the Council the examination of general, political and technical problems relating to national defense and the determination of the criteria and directives for the organization and coordination of activities which concem it.
2.1.2 The Supreme Defense Council ____________ This role of guaranteeing the constitutional balance in terms of political direction, defense and security, in particular, is clearly strengthened by law no. 25/1997 containing "Attributions of the Minister of Defense, and restructuring of the leaders of the Armed Forces and the Defense Administration" which, entailing the increase and relevance of the tasks of the Supreme Defense Council in matters of security and defense, increases also the political relevance of the duties of the Head of State, as President of the institutional body.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it On the actual command of the Armed Forces, although the doctrine seems to favor that it falls to the Govemment, according to the guidelines and under the control of Parliament, it nevertheless recognizes that the command constitutionally conferred on the President of the Republic cannot have a purely ceremonial and symbolic character, also in light of the fundamental role of control and guarantee, recognized by the Head of State, of the use of the Armed Forces. • 32


2.1.3 The Parliament The Parliament is the constitutional body that directly represents the popular will. The Constitution (articles 56, 57,
70 and 71) gives Parliament a central position and role in the political-constitutional system, configuring it as the most important link between the community and the rulers. Its centrality in the constitutional structure takes place through the ownership of functions of pre-eminent importance, among which the fundamental ones are the legislative function and that of political direction and control of the Govemment. It seems clear that the two fundamental functions of Parliament are inserted in a decisive and incisive way into the general policy of the Govemment and therefore into that of state security. national community.
Furthermore, the involvement of Parliament in govemment deliberations on defense and security entails a more shared political responsibility in the adoption of decisive choices for the future of the Nation and also contributes to establishing a respectful collaborative relationship between military leaders and political leaders of everyone's skills.
At the request of the President of the Republic, other Ministers, in addition to those indicated, other institutional positions of the State and the Armed Forces, as well as subjects with particular expertise in the scientific, industrial and economic fields, may participate.
The Supreme Defense Council normally meets twice a year, however the President of the Republic can call meetings whenever he deems necessary, subject to agreement with the President of the Council of Ministers, or on the proposal of the President of the Council of Ministers.
• obtain parliamentary consensus on govemment resolutions of great importance for the whole
• President of the Council of Ministers, with functions of Vice President; • Minister of Foreign Affairs; • Interior Minister; • Minister of the Treasury; • Ministry of Defense; • Minister of Productive Activities; • Chief of Defense Staff. country and for the maintenance of its intemational relations;
The Supreme Defense Council is chaired by the President of the Republic and has the following composition: • ____________ the Chief of Defense Staff - in order to allow the bodies that exercise the function of political-administrative direction or legislative, policy and supervisory functions, quicker identification of the various responsibilities; • provide for two subjects (security and defense policy) for which the Govemment has political responsibility, in the sense that it is responsible for developing the objectives and programs to be pursued in the field of defense and security and envisaging the related political, intemational and operational consequences and financial; • make those acts that are decisive for the life of the person promptly known to public opinion The monocratic principle in security and defense policy has been reiterated by constitutional jurisprudence itself. In fact, the Constitutional Court has significantly stated that it must be considered to have jurisdiction Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
• indicate a single entity responsible for the operation of the Armed Forces Although Law 25/1997 attributes the adoption of resolutions on security and defense matters to the entire Govemment, the need for timeliness in the adoption of decisions regarding the protection of state security have tempered the principle of collegiality with the equally pre-eminent monocratic principle, thus highlighting the figure of the President of the Council of Ministers, i.e. the body responsible for the general policy of the State.
In particular, as regards security policy, the approval of law no. 25/1997 seems to achieve at least four objectives:
2.1.4 The President of the Council of Ministers The function of the President of the Council of Ministers, as can be seen from the art. 95 of the Constitution, is to direct the activity of the Council of Ministers and to promote and coordinate that of the individual Ministers to guarantee the implementation of the collectively established political and administrative direction. More specifically, and also in light of law no. 400/1988, the main responsibilities of the Prime Minister in terms of state security are those of: • directing the general policy of the Govemment, for which he is responsible, to this end drawing up the program and establishing the directives; • coordinate the activities of individual Ministers in relation to acts that concem Govemment policy; • promote and solicit, also through directives, the Govemment's activity for the implementation of the agreed programme.
33


• issues directives regarding military policy, information and security activity and technical-administrative activity;
• proposals on the general lines of the organization of the bodies in the technical-administrative area e technical-industrial expertise;
Supreme Defense Council and approved by Parliament;
The Minister of Defence, based on the provisions of law 18 February 1997, n. 25 "Powers of the Minister of Defence, restructuring of the top management of the Armed Forces and the Defense Administration" and of the Presidential Decree of 25 October 1999, n. 556 "Regulation for the implementation of article 10 of Law no. 25 of 18 February 1997 conceming the duties of military leaders": • implements the resolutions on defense and security adopted by the Govemment, subjected to examination by the national industrial and technical-scientific;
• news on the strategic operational situation of national interest and on foreseeable developments; • information on the efficiency of the military instrument, on the need for human, material and financial resources to achieve the set objectives; • proposals and arrangements relating to the general financial planning of the military instrument; • proposals on joint operational planning and the consequent technical-financial programs; • general lines of the organization of each Armed Force; • distribution of military and civilian personnel resources to be assigned to the technical-operational bodies as well as that of military personnel to be assigned to the technical-administrative and technical-industrial bodies of the Defense. by the Secretary General, National Director of Armaments: • proposals regarding actions aimed at harmonizing defense objectives with economic policy-of the President of the Council of Ministers also political activity aimed at the intemal and extemal defense of the State.
On the basis of this ruling of the Constitutional Court, the legislator has explicitly provided for the President of the Council of Ministers, in relation to the "intemal" and "extemal" profiles of security, the attribution of the top management of the general political responsibility and of the coordination of the policy information and security in the interest and defense of the State (law 24 October 1977, n. 801, establishing the information and security services).
For the implementation of its responsibilities, it receives from the Chief of Defense Staff: ____________ of the Armed Forces; gives general directives to the Chief of Defense Staff: on the relationships he must maintain with the corresponding Military Authorities of other countries regarding military problems of common defense; on the national direction that it must represent at the high military assemblies established within the framework of intemational defense agreements; on the formulation by the Chief of Defense Staff of the common planning directives, for the use, logistical support and multinational training, of the programs and intemational technical-operational agreements resulting therefrom, taking into account the commitments undertaken; on the preparation and management of memorandums of understanding and intemational joint technical agreements having implications of an operational and/or training nature; on the sale of the vehicles and materials of the Armed Forces. with respect to countries with which there are bilateral or intemational agreements of any kind; • establishes, as regards the technical-administrative and technical-industrial area: the directives relating to scientific research of interest to the Armed Forces; the political-administrative and high-level administration guidelines regarding the technical-industrial and technical-administrative area of Defence; • gives national direction in the field of technical-scientific activities for defense purposes and represents in high intemational fora in the framework of the implementation of multinational agreements; avails itself of the high consultancy of the Superior Council of the Armed Forces for all matters foreseen by law. • Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
• issues directives on communication, public information and promotion activities of the armaments policy for which he is responsible.
• approves the joint general and operational planning with the consequent technical-financial programs as well as the planning relating to the industrial, public and private area of defense interest;
• technical-industrial consultative elements relating to the production of defense materials in the area
2.1.5 The Minister of Defense (fig.1) 34


• assist the Minister and carry out the tasks delegated to them with the ministerial decree published in the Official Joumal; • can intervene, as representatives of the Govemment, in the sessions of the Chambers and Commissions The Armed Forces are today defined as one of the tools used by the Govemment to implement its policy.
The Military Instrument, therefore, must be adequately structured and prepared to carry out the tasks assigned to it.
These tasks are defined in law 14 November 2000, n.331 containing the "Regulations for the establishment of the professional military service" and are configured as follows:
2.1.5.1 The Undersecretaries of State The Undersecretaries of State (art.10, law 23 August 1988, n. 400), appointed by decree of the President of the Republic, on the proposal of the President of the Council of Ministers, in agreement with the Minister of Defense :
As is known, it took ten years and four legislatures to complete this reform which, even if modified in some points, still retains the basic approach it had at the beginning. of Defence;
• differentiation and expansion of activities aimed at civil protection and environmental protection;
In summary, according to the democratic principle, the military leadership depends on the political leadership and is accountable for its actions to the political leadership.
Defense and National Armaments Director limited, for the latter, to technical-operational responsibilities.
• reduction and reorganization of the number of territorial operational commands and peripheral structures The entire set of provisions indicated above are placed in the "Ministerial Directive" on the basis of which the Chief of Defense Staff issues the "Strategic Concept" where the directives of the Minister of Defense are concretely implemented. pares", but hierarchically superior to the Heads of SM of the Armed Forces and to the Secretary General of the rationalization of public finance" linked to the 1996 budget where, in article 1, the guiding principles and criteria to be followed in the implementation phase of the subsequent specific delegation granted to the Govemment regarding the reorganization of military structures were indicated.
Consequently, "drafts" of legislative decrees were prepared which were essentially attributable to: ____________
2.2 The restructuring of the Armed Forces
2.2.1 Legislative legislation The current restructuring of the Defense largely traces its origins back to November 1986, when the then Minister of Defense Giovanni Spadolini presented to the Senate a draft bill aimed at revising the structure in a unified sense at the top of the Dicastery with the attribution of very specific responsibilities at the political and military levels. In fact, a Chief of Defense Minister who was no longer "primus inter" was envisaged The initial trigger of the latest changes was promoted by law 28 December 1995, n. 549 "Measurements of Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it they support the discussion in accordance with the Minister's directives and respond to questions and interpellations.
In reality, the changed intemational scenario, the crisis situations that arise suddenly, the various hotbeds of tension that manifest themselves in areas of priority national strategic interest, but also in other geographical areas where Italy has found itself operating in support of peace and human rights, had already induced the various Defense Ministers who followed after the collapse of the Berlin Wall to propose subsequent restructuring of the Armed Forces in light of the criterion, also followed by other nations, of reducing their quantity in favor of quality. parliamentarians;
1. the Armed Forces are at the service of the Republic;
2. the organization and activity of the Armed Forces comply with articles 11 and 52 of the Constitution and with the law;
3. the priority task of the Armed Forces is the defense of the State;
4. the Armed Forces also have the task of operating to achieve peace and security, in compliance with the rules of intemational law and the decisions of the intemational organizations of which Italy is a member; 5. the Armed Forces contribute to the protection of free institutions and carry out specific tasks in circumstances of public disasters and in other cases of extraordinary necessity and urgency.
35
FIGURE 1


At the conclusion of the activity of preparing the aforementioned legislative decrees, the "drafts" were subjected to the expected consultation with the trade unions, which concluded with the signing of two memoranda of understanding.
Furthermore, in compliance with the delegation granted to the Govemment with Law no. 662/96, Legislative Decree no. 490 of 30
December 1997 was promulgated, which provides for a general revision of the existing body of legislation regarding the recruitment, legal status and advancement of Officers. All with a view to strict inter-force homogeneity and within a framework of concrete contraction of the workforce.
II Legislative Decree of 28 November 1997 n. 464, has reorganised, in a reductive sense, the technical-operational area into its command, operational, logistics and scholastic-training components.
All without an initial definition of the reference "defense model", so many legislative provisions had to undergo subsequent variations to the point that even today the final goal is not fully outlined.
• disposal of structures and properties no longer used; • renovation of arsenals, factories and technical centres.
II Legislative Decree of 28 November 1997 n. 459 established the criteria for the organizational and functional reorganization of the technical-industrial area. In practice, the 35 bodies in the sector have been reduced in terms of staff by approximately 5,000 units with the aim of giving the entire sector concrete rationalization and significant streamlining. mobility;
The Legislative Decree of 16 July 1997, n. 265, issued new regulations regarding civilian personnel and established the mechanisms for the re-employment of personnel.
• establishment of the Higher Institute of Joint Forces Staff; • reorganization of the central area of the Ministry of Defence; • redetermination of the staffing of the civilian personnel of the Ministry of Defense and the related The latter, the Central Office of Budget and Financial Affairs (BILANDIFE) and the Central Office for Administrative Inspections (ISPEDIFE) were placed directly under the Minister, while the suppression of the Central Office for Military Equipment (ALLESDIFE ) and the Central Office for Organization, Methods, Mechanization and Statistics (ORMEDIFE) and the Central Office for Legal Studies and Legislation (LEGGIDIFE), resulted in the transfer of responsibilities, respectively, to the Office of the General Secretariat (SEGREDIFESA) and to the Cabinet of the Minister (DIFEGABINETTO) for LEGGIDIFE. ____________ This with particular reference to the duties of the Minister of Defense, the Chief of Defense Staff, the Secretary General of Defense and National Director of Armaments and the Chiefs of Staff of the individual Armed Forces. (Army, Navy and Air Force).
2.2.2 The succession of Legislative Decrees In particular, with the Legislative Decree of 16 July 1997, n. 264, the reorganization of the central area of the Ministry of Defense was set up, in order to simplify the difficult links between the General Directorates, the Central Offices and the General Staff. The Decree substantially halved the organizational structures of the central area of the Dicastery, with the reduction of the General Directorates from 19 to 10 and the Central Offices from 5 to 2.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it At the same time, Law no. was approved on 18 February 1997. 25 called "Reform of the Military Leaders".
Subsequently, the aforementioned Legislative Decrees were forwarded for consideration to the two houses of Parliament.
Therefore, this Decree is considered one of the main provisions of the reform, because it determines - after more than thirty years
- a drastic reduction of the technical-operational area of Defence. In fact, it: - defines the provisions for the suppression, revision and adaptation of the Commands/Bodies of the territorial, operational and training organization of each individual Armed Force and joint forces, reducing, among others, the number of Territorial Military Commands of the Armed Forces ( Military Region Commands for the Army, Chief Commands of the Maritime Military Department for the Navy, Air Region Commands for the Air Force); • seeks to pursue a better overall balance of the operational tool in its various components and articulations, attempting to achieve a qualitative increase in forces and an increase in extemal projection capacity, with accentuated "response" readiness, high autonomy and logistical sustainability, in coherence with the force structure defined in the new NATO doctrine;
36


At a later time, and precisely after 31 months, in light of the instructions taken from the previous Legislative Decree, in the presence of a specific legislative delegation, a further Legislative Decree no. 21 May 2000 was issued. 214 "Corrective and supplementary provisions of Legislative Decree 28 November 1997 n. 464 containing structural reforms of the Armed Forces, pursuant to art. 9, paragraph 2 of law 31 March 2000, n. 78".
The Chief of Defense:
• depends directly on the Minister of Defence, of which he is the senior technical-military consultant, and to whom he is responsible for the implementation of the political-military directions received regarding the planning, preparation and use of the military instrument;
• prepares the regulatory bases for civil protection and environmental protection activities.
Major of the Armed Forces, with the task of perfecting the professional training and cultural preparation of the Officers of the Armed Forces;
2.2.3 The Chief of Defense Staff Armed Forces, delegating to logistics Commands/Inspectorates and Commands/Inspectorates responsible for the scholastic-training function functions that, previously, were typical of the General Staff; • establishes the Higher Institute of Joint Forces Staff, replacing the Higher State Courses The entire set of regulations had in the meantime found a more precise specification with the Decree of the President of the Republic dated 25 October 1999 n. 556, "Regulation for the implementation of art. 10 of law 18 February 1997, n. 25, conceming the powers of the Military Summits" especially with regard to the dependencies and responsibilities of the military summits, which found further clarification in the combined provided for by the two rules in the title.
In this way it was intended to formalize the regulatory support necessary to support the future developments of the "Defense panorama" and the four pillars that support it: the reform of top management, the reform of personnel, the restructuring of the operational instrument and the streamlining of the area technical-administrative and technical-logistical support.
• tends to simplify the organization of the operational, logistical and scholastic-training Command, providing, among others, a joint top operational command (COI) and operational commands of
• defines the overall operational and technical-financial priorities; • issues joint-force directives conceming logistics, transport and military healthcare; ____________ Also in the year 2000 on the basis of law 20 October 1999, n. 380 which established the possibility for Italian citizens to participate, on a voluntary basis, in competitions for the recruitment of Officers, Non-Commissioned Officers in permanent service and enlisted soldiers in voluntary service, in the roles of the Armed Forces and the Guardia di Finanza, was issued the Legislative Decree of 31 January 2000 n. 24. Recruitment, legal status and advancement for women's military service were thus regulated. All mainly inspired by the implementation of the principle of equal opportunities in recruitment and access to different grades, qualifications, specializations and positions. ,
• proposes to the Minister the general lines of the organization and the distribution of military and civilian personnel resources within the technical-operational, technical-administrative and technical-industrial areas.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it This last ordering provision, in more detail, affected the so-called Peripheral High Commands of the FA with particular reference to the Army (Military Region Commands) and the Air Force (Air Region Commands) redistributing their extensive logistical-administrative attributions-garrison-infrastructural and conscription and recruitment in a small number of Inspectorates/Commands created from scratch and responsible for a single function on a national scale. human, material and financial to achieve the objectives set;
This regulatory act concemed the operational bodies of the Army, Navy and Air Force and was aimed at further eliminating the duplication of efforts and the expenditure of energy deriving from the different organisation, preparation and use of the individual Armed Forces and at ensuring adequate compliance of the military organization with the need for joint planning and integrated direction and management of the instrument.
• proposes to the Minister the general financial and operational planning of the joint forces, as well as the consequent technical-financial programs, after consulting the Chiefs of Staff of the Armed Forces; presents the strategic operational situation of national interest and foreseeable developments to the Minister of Defence; • reports to the Minister of Defense on the efficiency of the military instrument, indicating the necessary resources 37


Minister to the extent of his competence; uniform behavior.
Within the financial sector, the Secretary General/National Director of Armaments, based on the directives of the Chief of
Defense Staff, exercises:
As regards the use of personnel, the Chief of Defense Staff: • designates, on the basis of the proposals made by the Chiefs of Staff of the Armed Forces, the Officers assigned to assignments in the joint forces, intemationally and in other Dicasteries, informing The Within the financial sector, the Chief of Defense Staff: • exercises operational control of the funds intended for investment; • exercises operational control of the funds allocated to the operating sector; • issues directives for the operational use of investment funds, exercising it through the
• directs, directs and coordinates the activities of the General Directorates, issuing rules and directives
• exercise the function of command of the respective Armed Force;
• issues directives regarding mobilization and related escorts.
2.2.4 The Secretary General of Defense and National Director of Armaments: • reports directly to the Minister of Defense for administrative duties and to the Chief of Defense for technical-operational duties; • exercises the duties inherent to the top administration of the technical-administrative and technical-industrial areas, based on the directives received from the Minister to whom he is responsible for their implementation; • proposes actions to harmonize objectives regarding research and development, production and procurement of weapon systems, vehicles and equipment both nationally and intemationally;
• report directly to the Chief of Defense Staff, to whom they are responsible for the implementation of the directives and provisions received;
• proposes to the Minister of Defence, after consulting the Heads of Armed Forces, the general lines of the organization of each Armed Force;
• exercises the Operational Command of operations and exercises both nationally and intemationally, making use of the Joint Operational Commander. In particular, for information activities, it supervises the related activities using the specific department which took over the functions of the dissolved departments (SIOS) of the Armed Forces.
As regards the use of personnel, the General Secretary/National Director of Armaments proposes to the Chief of Defense Staff the qualitative and quantitative needs of the personnel to be assigned to the General Secretariat, the General Directorates and the joint forces bodies of the technical-administrative and industrial. Finally, regarding the use of forces, based on the provisions of the Chief of Defense Staff, it issues directives for the definition of activities related to militarization and civil mobilization, in relation to the technical-administrative and industrial area. ____________
• sets operational objectives, those of information research, training and exercises, verifying the operational capabilities of the Armed Forces; technical-administrative and industrial.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it Secretary General of Defense and Heads of SM of FA. •
• defines the general criteria for use in the Armed Forces; • provides information to the Minister, after consulting the Chiefs of Staff of the Armed Forces, regarding the assignment of Lieutenant Generals or corresponding ranks to the various positions of the individual Armed Forces. Regarding the use of the forces as a whole, the Chief of Defense Staff, on the basis of the Minister's directives: the operational control of the funds intended for the functioning sector of the technical-administrative and industrial area, of which it also holds and exercises the operational use, including those intended for cooperation and intemational agreements; • the operational use of funds allocated to the joint research and development and investment sectors of the area
2.2.5 The Chiefs of Staff of the Armed Forces:
38


General;
• define the training activity of the respective Armed Force; • ensure, for the exercise of national and multinational joint operations and exercises, the qualitative and quantitative availability of operational departments; the operational control of the funds intended for the operational sector of the respective Armed Force, of which they also hold and exercise the operational use, with the power to provide for the administration of those intended for the efficiency of the means and materials with skills similar to those of the Directors Within the financial sector, the Chiefs of Staff of the Armed Forces, based on the directives issued by the Chief of Defense
Staff, exercise:
Armed Forces and based on the provisions issued by the Chief of Defense Staff:
To complete the regulatory framework, it is necessary to add to the series of legislative decrees indicated above:
• law 31 March 2000 n. 78 "Delegation to the Govemment regarding the reorganization of the Carabinieri, the State Forestry Corps, the Financial Police and the State Police. Rules regarding the coordination of the Police Forces" and the descending delegated decrees no. 297 and 298 of 5 October 2000 which elevated the Carabinieri to the rank of Armed Force also allowing the reorganization and qualification of its structure with extensive use of new technological resources; respective Armed Forces.
Finally, regarding the use of forces in the context of the exercise of the command function of one's own forces
2.2.7 The Committee of Heads of SM (made up of the Secretary General of Defense and National Director of Armaments, the Heads of SM of FA, the Commander General of the Carabinieri) is an advisory body to the Head of SMD who presides over said high assembly.
• are responsible for the organisation, preparation, training and logistics of the
• designate, by giving prior notice to the Chief of Defense Staff, the General Officers or Admirals of a rank not higher than Major General or equivalent, to be assigned to the various roles within the respective Armed Force; • ensure the handling of matters relating to the use of Officer, NonCommissioned Officer and Troop personnel of the Armed Forces, without prejudice to the duties of the Chief of Defense Staff, and implementing the relevant administrative acts.
As far as the financial and administrative sector is concemed, the General Commander is responsible for both the activities of the Central Body (planning body, General Management and Administrative Responsibility Centre) and the so-called "decentralised" one (proper to the Territorial Military Command) from which the dual role that characterizes his juridical-administrative figure.
Furthermore, the General Commander defines the organizational and operational policies necessary to achieve the institutional objectives: he therefore has all the policy, administrative and management tools allocated within the General Command.
• propose to the Chief of Defense Staff the Officers destined to hold positions in the joint forces, intemationally and in other Dicasteries, as well as the Lieutenant Generals or equivalents to be assigned to the various Armed Forces positions; ____________ As regards the use of personnel, the Chiefs of Staff of the Armed Forces:
2.2.6 The General Commander of the Carabinieri: depends on the Chief of Defense for the fulfillment of military tasks. He is also invested with duties in the operational, training and technical-logistical fields, in matters of recruitment, status, advancement and employment, in line with the provisions of the "law on defense leaders" and with the subsequent "implementation regulation".
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
• the operational use of funds allocated to the investment sector of the respective Armed Forces. of interest to the respective Armed Forces. •
• direct and conduct operations and exercises, making use of dependent operational commanders
• law 14 November 2000 n. 331 "Regulations for the establishment of professional military service" followed from Legislative Decree 8 May 2001 n.215 "Provisions to regulate the progressive transformation of the military instrument into a professional one, in accordance with art. 3, paragraph 1, of law 14 39


2.2.8 Security The President of the Council of Ministers is assigned top management, general political responsibility and coordination of information and security policy in the interest and for the defense of the democratic State and the institutions established by the Constitution as its foundation (art. 1 law no. 801).
The Minister of Defence, on whom the SISMI depends, establishes its organization and takes care of its activities on the basis of the directives and provisions of the President of the Council of Ministers.
The primary and direct competence of the Minister of Defense in the sector of Military Policy is thus further reaffirmed and therefore in the issuing of the consequent guidelines to all dependent bodies. Just as he is assigned the tool for monitoring the achievement of the objectives set in the "ministerial directive". the Presidential Decree of 14 May 2001, n. 241 "Regulations for the organization of the offices of direct collaboration of the Minister of Defense" which, in defining the structure of the Cabinet, establishes in particular the establishment of the Office for Military Policy - included in the past in the Defense General Staff - and of the Service of intemal control, recently established in all ministries.
In this regard, it is necessary to underline that some States use their information services as an offensive tool of "indirect strategy" whose dynamics are not limited to military espionage but above all reveal forms of political, industrial, technological espionage or subversion, sabotage, disinformation , penetration into the Armed Forces and manipulation of social groups. The counter-espionage activity conducted by SISMI tends to prevent all forms of indirect strategy, applied against the Italian State and its systems, and in any case to prevent them from achieving their objectives. (officers, non-commissioned officers and enlisted men of the Army, Navy and Air Force);
• concems the military sphere, keeping in mind the extension that this concept has undergone towards the global defense of the State, also including sectors such as political-military, economic, industrial, technological, scientific research which have direct repercussions on military potential ; • is aimed on the one hand at acquiring information that may have an impact on the defense of the State and on the other at precluding access to the information services of other States (counter-espionage).
The Committee is chaired by the President of the Council of Ministers and is made up of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs, the Interior, Justice, Defence, Productive Activities and Finance (art. 2 law n.801).
November 2000, n. 331" which imposed a tuming point with a high qualitative and quantitative impact on the entire Defense structure, both because they led to the suspension of compulsory conscription and because they reduced the entire military personnel to 190,000 elements • Errors of evaluation in the field of information can lead political authorities to decisions that are not relevant to the defense of the State. These considerations underline not only the delicate work of collection, evaluation and interpretation of the large mass of information that modem means of research and communication make available, but above all they enhance the professionalism, experience, culture, intellectual rigor and honesty moral, as peculiar qualities of Information and Security Services personnel.
An inter-ministerial Committee for Information and Security has been established at the Presidency of the Council of Ministers with consultancy and proposal functions for the President of the Council of Ministers, on the general guidelines and fundamental objectives to be pursued within the framework of the information and security policy. ____________ In essence, the SISMI represents a defense tool and its activity:
The SISMI carries out all information and security tasks for the military defense of the independence and integrity of the State from any danger, threat or aggression. The SISMI also carries out, for the aforementioned purposes, counter-espionage tasks (art. 4 law no. 801).
Every decision-making act must be supported by reliable information elements: the more in line with reality the decision is, the greater the availability of reliable information.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it is therefore confirmed that the assessment of the threat to Italy is institutionally entrusted to the Military Security Information Service (Law 24 October 1977 n. 801 "Institutions and regulations of services for information and security and regulation of state secrets" ).
The activity of the SISMI is carried out within the exclusive framework of the directives received from the political authorities and another important aspect of it is represented by the development of analyzes and situations.
2.2.8.1 The SISMI The entire restructuring process could not fail to also impact information and security activities, albeit to a lesser extent as the basic system, the one relating to the SISMI, has not undergone any changes.
The SISMI is required to communicate to the Minister of Defense and to the Executive Committee for Information and Security Services (CESIS) all the information received or in its possession, the analyzes and situations developed, the operations carried out and everything relating to its activity (art. 4 law n. 801).
40


2.2.8.2 With the law on the restructuring of the top management of the Armed Forces (law 25/97) and, subsequently, with the provisions of Presidential Decree 556/99 (Implementation Regulation), the SIOS (Operational and Situation Information Services) of the Armed Forces were dissolved and the information activity was brought to joint force level at the Defense General Staff.
2.3.1 The Defense General Staff The organization of the Defense General Staff (fig. 2) in addition to including the staff bodies and the COI, is characterized by an adequate joint force component which is completed with the following bodies: • Following the aforementioned law 25/1997 on the reform of top management and the subsequent legislative provisions, the Defense structures have taken on a new organizational configuration.
In summary, the SISMI finds its place in the structures of the State, which through its bodies directs and controls its activities in compliance with "three indispensable purposes of the Security Services": - their correct functioning within the principles and rules of Constitution; - their secrecy; - their efficiency.
In this way it was intended to carry out a more careful work of inter-force harmonization and homogenisation in the awareness, moreover, that further efforts must be made to centralize at the level of the Defense General Staff many functions that are repeated in the Armed Forces General Staff.
The control of SISMI activities is carried out on two levels: • on the govemmental level, through the top management and general political responsibility of the President of the Council of Ministers, who avails himself of the advice of the inter-ministerial committee for the definition of the fundamental objectives to be pursued ; • on a parliamentary level, through the Govemment's half-yearly report to Parliament through the Committee established by the two branches of Parliament.
2.3 The defense system NBC Defense, Telecommunications and Air Cooperation; the Joint Control and Management Center of the Italian Satellite for Confidential Communications and Alarm (SICRAL).
The Govemment reports to Parliament every six months, with a written report, on the information and security policy and on the results obtained. A parliamentary committee made up of four deputies and four senators appointed by the Presidents of the two branches of Parliament, on the basis of the proportionality criterion, exercises control over the application of the principles established by this law (art. 11 law no. 801).
Furthermore, the intemal security function carried out to protect the military structures and infrastructures in the homeland should not be overlooked, in close connection, in this case, with the Carabinieri and with the specialized bodies of the service itself at all organizational levels. •
• the three joint schools, responsible for the specialization of personnel in the fields respectively of ____________ The usefulness of this function has assumed particular importance in peace-keeping operations underway for many years as an element of guarantee for the performance of operational activity both at the management level of the commands and at the executive level of the departments.
The activity naturally fits into that of the SISMI which, operating on a broader scale, is able to provide a general overview of the situation and reference support with the connected services. • Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The information and security research activity starts from the directives of the Minister of Defense (Presidential Decree 556/99, art. 2, paragraph 1, letter o) and is developed, through the definition of the objectives, by the Chief of Staff of the Defence.
Joint General Staff (ISSMI) and Military Center for Strategic Studies (CeMiSS), responsible for joint training of Armed Forces Officers; the Joint Center for Armaments Verification (CIVA), responsible for managing inspection activities deriving from the application of treaties in terms of armaments;
The transfer of competence was sanctioned by the directive of the Minister of Defense n. 1/30863/14.1.8/97 on 15 May
1997 and the activity, after an experimental phase, took on a definitive configuration on 1 September 2000 with the establishment of the Information and Security Department and the employees of the Joint Intelligence Center and Joint Intelligence/Electronic Warfare School. the Center for Advanced Defense Studies (CASD), divided into the Institute for Advanced Defense Studies (IASD), Institute of The RIS (Information and Security Department) 41


It administers all military personnel (in service and retired) of the Army, Navy, Air Force and Carabinieri and deals with the
following matters:
• recruitment of Officers, Non-Commissioned Officers and Volunteers through competition; legal status, advancement, discipline, rewards, honors and benefits of Officers, Non-Commissioned Officers, Volunteers and Troops; budget and financial affairs, ongoing and possible economic treatments, fair compensation; characteristic and serial documentation; pension treatment; debt collection;
Military academies and institutes, military magistrates and officers of the military justice corps on leave, as well as defense workers;
The General Directorate - which became operational on 1 April 1998 with the appointment of the Director General - merged the four pre-existing General Directorates for Military Personnel (Army Officers, Army Non-Commissioned Officers, Navy Personnel and Air Force Personnel) and absorbed the duties relating to military personnel, previously the responsibility of the General Directorates of Litigation, Pensions and Personnel Benefits.
But we must not forget the additional needs that the Armed Forces must satisfy, in terms of personnel, to supply both intemational bodies and other ministries:
• legal status and discipline; • economic and pension treatment of civilian defense employees, professors of the General Directorates
2.3.2.1 General Directorate for Military Personnel (PERSOMIL) benefits and honors, matriculation documentation;
• recruitment, hiring, legal status, discipline, employment and mobility, education and training, General Directorate for Civilian Personnel (PERSOCIV) 2.3.2.2 The General Directorate, which merged the two previous General Directorates of civil personnel (Employees and Workers) and partially absorbed the responsibilities of the dissolved General Directorates of Litigation, Pensions and Assistance to Personnel, deals with
matters relating to civilian personnel: ____________ The organization of the General Secretariat / DNA (fig. 3) in addition to the staff divided into two sectors distinguished by competence: armaments policy and administration of personnel and services, provides ten General Directorates (fig. 4) corresponding in terms of competence to the aforementioned division in distinct sectors.
The overall staff of the four pre-existing General Directorates amounted to approximately 4,500 units. When the General Directorate for Military Personnel was established (1998), the expected workforce was estimated at 1,433 units, of which
178 military and 1,255 civilians. Considering that the 25 Divisions now existing have merged 81 pre-existing Divisions, it has been proposed to increase the workforce to 2,099 units, an essential number to be able to achieve the planned objectives.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
2.3.2 The General Secretariat of Defense The General Director is assisted by three Deputy Directors. The General Management is divided into 7 Departments and
25 Divisions.
• ordinary and special NATO accidents and computerization of procedures; • recognition of qualifications and attribution of rewards to the Partisans.
EFFECTIVE IN OTHER DICASTERIES
FIGURE 3
ACTUAL JOINT FORCE BODIES 42
FIGURE 2
FIGURE 4
STAFF SUMMARY TABLE
FIGURE 2A


The General Management provides:
The General Directorate has tasks relating to technical study and development, standardisation, procurement, distribution, processing and disposal activities with regards to: • portable weapons, machine guns, mortars, recoilless guns, wheeled and self-propelled artillery, rocket launchers, rocket launchers artifices, shoulder materials, helmets, bulletproof and fragment-proof vests, fighter equipment in general; • ammunition for portable weapons, machine guns, mortars, artillery, rockets, artifices, hand grenades, rifle bombs, explosives, mines, laying systems, detectors and mine clearance systems, exploders, hollow and prepared charges, explosive components; •
2.3.2.3 General Directorate of Conscription, Compulsory Recruitment, Militarization, Civil Mobilization and Auxiliary Corps (LEVADIFE) The General Directorate is assigned the duties of the pre-existing General Directorates relating to armament (Terrarmimuni) and land vehicles (Motordife), appropriately modified, those on materials already under the responsibility of the General Directorate of Engineers (Geniodife) and others of the General Directorate of aeronautical armaments (Armappello) and litigation (Contendife).
The personnel in service at Persociv amounts to a total of 471 military and civilian units, compared to a need of 503 units.
• commercial, tactical, armored, combat and special motor vehicles; • tactical, amphibious, combat and special tracked vehicles; • machines for earthmoving and for construction and road works, special pneumatic, hydraulic and electric equipment for engineering work, mobile systems for the life of the troops in relation to the construction and plant engineering structure, bridges on fixed supports and mobile cable transport systems , mobile and fixed railway material, locomotives, railway bridges and specific materials, road and rail vehicles, prefabricated metal structures and materials for field fortification.
To carry out its functions, the General Directorate of Land Armaments makes use of 2 UTTs (Territorial Technical Offices).
The General Management is divided into 6 Departments, 18 Divisions and a Litigation and Labor Office. The General Director makes use of two Deputy, one civilian and one military.
2.3.2.4 General Directorate of Land Armaments (TERRARM) control for Army weapon systems;
• handling of labor disputes and legal affairs.
The personnel currently in service at Levadife amounts to a total of 201 military and civilian units, compared to a need of 250 units. •
• means and materials for nuclear, biological and chemical defense, materials for fire protection; • surface/surface and surface/air missile systems; • electronic, optical and optoelectronic systems, telecommunications, electronic warfare and command e Within the framework of the rules relating to the transition from military service to professional service, the Directorate will also assume functions relating to the placement of volunteers in the world of work at the end of their service.
The General Management is divided into 9 Divisions of which 2, the 8th and 9th, provided for by the Ministerial Decree of 8
June 2001 (art.10) registered at the Court of Auditors on 22.6.2001, are still in the organizational phase. ____________ • Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it compulsory recruitment in the Army, Navy and Air Force; to militarization and civil mobilization; to the discussion of matters relating to recruitment, status, advancement, employment, discipline, characteristic and matriculation documentation and the economic treatment of the personnel of the Spiritual Assistance Service, of the military personnel of the Association of the Italian Knights of the Sovereign Military Order of Malta and military personnel of the Italian Red Cross; to the treatment of practices relating to soldiers fallen and missing in war and to the formation of the Roll of Honor; to the annual planning of the quantitative and qualitative income of the voluntary military personnel discharged without demerit to be included in the world of work; to the definition, in agreement with the State-Regions conference, of programs of initiatives regarding professional training and placement on the labor market of short-term and long-term service volunteers. •
• the organization and carrying out of operations relating to the draft, aptitude selection and • The personnel in service at Terrarm amounts to a total of 324 military and civilian units, compared to a requirement of 354 units.
43


management of the acquisition of centrally controlled materials (transferred to the Navy Stock Management Center - MARICEGESCO) and that of general use materials.
Within the central organization, the General Director is assisted by a Deputy General Director (civilian).
4 Departments report to the General Director, three with a predominantly technical content (headed by Brigadier Generals or equivalent rank) and one with an administrative vocation, headed by a civilian Manager.
The transfer of responsibilities following the suppression of some General Directorates (particularly that of Litigation) and the transfer to other branches of the Armed Forces Work Establishments, have determined on the one hand the attribution to NAVARM of additional tasks, such as the management of litigation with the contracting companies and that relating to naval and maritime accidents, and on the other the cessation of duties such as the exercise of maintenance of naval units (transferred to the Inspectorate of Naval Logistics and Lighthouses Support of the Navy - NAVISPELOG - and to arsenals dependent on it), the
• supervises the study and technical development, acquisition, construction, transformation, distribution and conservation, refitting, maintenance, overhaul and repair, recovery and disposal of naval vessels and weapons, ammunition, equipment and equipment which form an integral and inseparable part of the "ship system"; • programmes, plans and carries out the consequent technical-administrative procedures connected with the acquisition of naval units and vessels and the related on-board systems, as well as with the management of mid-life transformations and modemizations of naval units;
To carry out its functions, the General Directorate of Aeronautical Armaments makes use of 3 Territorial Technical Offices.
The General Management:
- that they are safe for the crews, transported personnel and populations flown over; - which respond to operational requirements, in a timely manner and at appropriate prices, taking into due account the need not to depress, but to encourage the efficiency, productivity and scientific and technological growth of the national industrial base in the vision of European integration and fair transatlantic cooperation.
The General Management also carries out Logistics Support activities (even if not strictly within its competence) requested by the planning bodies and intemational activities in programs regulated by
2.3.2.5 General Directorate of Naval Armaments (NAVARM) The General Directorate of Aeronautical Armaments is responsible for acquiring and making available to the operational units of the Armed Forces as well as, when requested, the State Armed Corps and Civil Protection: • aeronautical
weapon systems:
The General Management has exclusive responsibility for the modemization and upgrading activities relating to: • radar and electronic systems; • broadcast material; • communication and space observation systems; • IT and telematic systems.
In this context it constitutes a "Joint Forces Hub" for procurement in the sectors of IT and Telematics, Flight Assistance and Meteorology, Command, Control, Communications and Information (C3I), Radar and electronic surveillance and warfare systems electronics and space activities. It also has jurisdiction over study, research and development and experimentation activities in the aforementioned sectors in relation to materials as long as they are not an integral part of weapon systems. ____________ The personnel in service at Navarm amounts to a total of 247 military and civilian units, compared to a requirement of 322 units.
2.3.2.6 General Directorate of Aeronautical Armaments (ARMAEREO)
2.3.2.7 General Directorate of Telecommunications, IT and Advanced Technologies (TELEDIFE) Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it To carry out its functions, the General Directorate of Naval Armaments makes use of 4 UTTs (Territorial Technical Offices).
The personnel in service at Armaeronautica amounts to a total of 319 military and civilian units, compared to a requirement of 368 units.
The central structure is organized into 4 Departments, which are in tum divided into 14 Divisions responsible for categories of shipping, systems, systems and administrative aspects.
The new organization maintains the current functions and responsibilities, instead changing the way of operating, which is no longer based on a widespread and continuous presence at the various companies, but on inspections to be carried out in response to specific needs.
44


2.3.2.8 General Directorate of the Commissariat and General Services (COMMISERVIZI)
• clearance of explosive devices on national territory; expropriations, purchases, exchanges, disposals, declassification and easements; concessions, rents, energy supplies, state housing and compensation for damages, military and airport easements. • budget and payments and administrative disputes; general building design, for the construction of permanent and temporary infrastructures in national or intemational territory and design for the construction of permanent and temporary systems on national or intemational territory. • The personnel in service at Teledife amounts to a total of 292 military and civilian units, compared to a requirement of 362 units.
The restructuring referred to in the Ministerial Decree of 26.1.1998 involved the transfer to the General Directorate of various programs, previously developed and followed by other General Directorates, with an increase in workloads and adaptation difficulties encountered in acquiring the necessary new knowledge and professional experience to meet needs.
The General Management supervises the following activities:
• approval and checks in the field of infrastructure systems and testing of works; work related to bilateral intemational agreements, relations with NATO, Italian section in the mixed Italy/USA construction commission; activities related to coordination with the Armed Forces General Staff for infrastructural interventions (construction and maintenance of ordinary and special buildings and systems); • proposals for approval of projects and assignment of works and coordination and supervision of Furthermore, the General Directorate, through its General Director, is "Responsible for Information Systems of the Defense Administration" and, through the Head of the 3rd Department, exercises the functions of "Responsible for Telephony of the Defense Administration".
2.3.2.9 General Directorate of Works and State Property (GENIODIFE) Memorandum of Understanding and/or cooperation agreements, in the field of research and development and technological research, both within NATO and WEAG/WEAU.
The staff in service at Commiservizi, between the General Management and Territorial Technical Offices, amounts to a total of 522 military and civilian units, compared to a requirement of 515 units.
The General Directorate supervises military healthcare activity and the following activities:
• military scientific and public health research; • preventive and social medicine; healthcare litigation; • military transfusion service; • curative and rehabilitative medicine; forensic medicine; military psychology and health statistics. ____________
2 Departments report to the General Director, both divided into four Divisions.
In the area of responsibilities, Commiservizi pursues and achieves particular objectives, such as: transparency, through the strengthening of the URP and the website on which the contractual activity is advertised in terms of planning, execution and conclusion and the legislation which regulates the sector; spending control, through which it was possible to achieve price savings of around 20% compared to the past; search for maximum cost-effectiveness, through the reduction and merging of tenders, with the achievement of savings of over 57% compared to the past; timeliness of administrative action, with the achievement of the objective of settling invoices in 40-60 days, instead of the 90 required by current legislation; "pushed" informativeness; resource optimization; reduction of litigation; regulatory renewal.
2.3.2.10 General Directorate of Military Health (DIFESAN) Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it catering, cleaning, etc.
The personnel in service at Geniodife amounts to a total of 213 military and civilian units, compared to a need of 267 units.
The General Directorate has absorbed the pre-existing General Directorates of the Commissariat and General Services, taking over their respective skills in the fields of study, development, procurement, distribution, support and disposal in the sectors of: • food; • fodder; • clothing; • barracks equipment and materials, and the acquisition of transport services, labour, executive activities;
45


• discussion of the currency, fiscal and tax aspects conceming intemational agreements, ensuring, in this regard, legal-administrative and technical-financial consultancy for the correct preparation of the "memorandum of understanding"; • •
• processing of proposals for changes to ordinary allocations, during the year, for the purposes of budget management, by the Administrative Responsibility Centres; • preparation of ministerial provisions for the attribution of funds to Planning Bodies and Administrative Responsibility Centres; • administration of budget funds relating to expenses for which it acts as planning body; • instruction of practices relating to economic and currency issues, in relation to the agreements relevant to NATO infrastructure;
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The Office is responsible, in general, for the formation and management of the Defense budget, as the body responsible for maintaining relations with the Ministry of Economy and Finance. In particular, it provides for: • preparation of the Ministry of Defense's forecast scheme, prepared in a dual capacity, intra-community, by the Defense Administration;
With Ministerial Decree 24.11.1997, the Office was also assigned administrative checks on compliance with the provisions on part-time work (L. 662/1996).
The personnel in service at Bilandife amounts to a total of 40 military and civilian units, compared to a need of 58 units.
The staff of the General Directorate amounts to a total of 116 units (38 military and 78 civilians). Unlike the other General Directorates, Difesan was not subjected to the reorganization process resulting from the law on military leaders. The reorganization has been postponed to the more comprehensive reorganization of the Military Healthcare, in progress and to the examination of the current Legislature.
• definition of practices connected with the movement of materials, vehicles and personnel in the area
• instruction on practices relating to fiscal and tax issues, at a national level, as well as those at an intemational level;
• instruction on practices relating to intemational agreements stipulated by Defence, in close contact Regarding healthcare and pharmaceutical materials, Difesan is responsible for: • technical study and development;
• construction, production, supply, processing, distribution and storage; • maintenance, repair, overhaul, recovery and disposal; • issuing of the relevant technical regulations.
• completion of the documents relating to the definition of the economic treatment of personnel employed outside the national territory. ____________ intemational agreements stipulated by Defence;
• completion of documents relating to the "operational and administrative control and use" of the funds financial and economic;
They are subject to verification of the regularity of the administrative action pursuant to articles 524 et seq. of the Regulation for the Administration and accounting of the Army, Navy and Air Force bodies (RAU, approved with Presidential Decree 5.6.1976, n. 1076) approximately 650 Defense Administration bodies/detachments.
The Central Office provides: the service of administrative and accounting inspections, with both direct and decentralized action, promoting the assessment of any responsibilities and the consequent measures: the relations with the Ministry of the Treasury for the activity delegated to it in the inspection field .
2.3.3.1 Central Office of Budget and Financial Affairs (BILANDIFE)
• management of the "single VAT number", for acquisitions made at a national level and Community (WEU/EU);
2.3.3 The Central Offices With the same legislative measure that reduced the General Directorates, the Central Offices were also reduced and thus went from 5 to 2, remaining under the direct control of the Minister.
2.3.3.2 Central Office for Administrative Inspections (ISPEDIFE) with the Ministry of Finance, with regards to fiscal and tax aspects;
It also supervises the training, when carried out at the dependent bodies and establishments, of technical and specialized military and civilian personnel for the operational units and for the training, logistical and territorial bodies.
The Director General reports directly to the Minister.
46


The inspections are, as a rule, ordinary, i.e. carried out periodically, as part of the planning prepared for the year in question; when the need arises, however, extraordinary inspections can be arranged.
The personnel in service at Ispedife amounts to a total of 63 military and civilian units, compared to a need of 125 units. ____________
2.3.4 The Army The following depend on the Chief of Staff of the Army: the Army General Staff; the Land Operational Forces Command (COMFOTER), which also holds the NATO position of Joint Head Quarter South (JHQS), on which 4 Intermediate Operational Commands depend which include the current 13 EI Brigades plus Support; The Logistics Inspectorate; The newly established Inspectorate for Training and Specialization, on which all training institutes and specialization schools depend; The Infrastructure Inspectorate, with functions in the state property and infrastructure sector on a national scale for the management of the real estate assets of the Armed Forces; the three Military Region Commands (North, Center and South). Furthermore, by 2001 it is expected that the Northem and Southem Regional Commands will be placed under the Logistics Inspectorate. assisted by a Deputy Director with the rank of Brigadier General (or equivalent).
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
- COMFOTER (Operational Command of the Land Forces): unchanged tasks and functions;
Cdo FOP: Operational Projection Forces, Cdo expandable in an inter-force and intemational sense and projectable in a Theater outside the national territory as Cdo of the Force. The Brigades and combat support and support units operate under it, oriented towards carrying out the tasks of projection (defence of extemal interests and contribution to Intemational Security) and reaction (integrated defense of national spaces and of the Alliance); Cdo TA: Alpine Troops, potentially projectible and expandable Cd, capable of rotating the FOP in case of prolonged interventions, under which the Brigades and combat support and logistical support units suitable for use in missions operate of projection and presence and surveillance of national spaces; Cdo 1st and 2nd FOD: Defense Operational Forces; CDI capable of satisfying the operational needs connected with the national territory, including those of cooperation with other state institutions in the event of serious disasters and disturbances of public order. The Brigades and support units operate under them The General Director reports directly to the Minister and is the DG govemed by a first level manager The Army will soon reorganize the recruitment structure by creating the Inspectorate for Recruitment and Completion Forces (reconfigured on the basis of the Central Military Region Command).
The total staff employed in the General Directorates and Central Offices amounts to:
(FUTURE)
SUMMARY OVERVIEW OF THE ARMY'S ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE
TABLE FOLLOWS
FIGURE 3A
ARMY COMMAND ORGANIZATION 47
FIGURE 4
EXPLANATORY NOTES


dependencies of the Sub-Chief of EMS: ____________
• General Affairs Department (RAG), responsible for defining both the intemal and extemal communication "policy" and the promotional one of the FA. It also carries out study, research and guidance activities on the "quality of life" in military structures and deals with problems relating to well-being and social affairs;
Therefore the EMS, in January 1998, was divided (fig. 5) into: • an Office of the Chief of Staff of the Army; • a General Office of the Administrative Responsibility Centre; • both directly reporting to the Chief of Staff of the Army and in the following five Departments, located at
2.3.4.1 Army General Staff The Army General Staff has also been reconfigured to adapt its structure to the new functions attributed to the Chief of Staff of the Army and to create a planning body - rather than a command body - with the task of "looking to the future" and that is to the presumable employment scenarios and the related structural evolution of the Armed Forces.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
• Force Employment Department (RIF), which carries out study, research, development and general direction activities in the fields of operational planning, training, doctrine and security; • Logistics Department (RL), responsible for defining the "policy", developing the technical-administrative directives and defining the priorities with which all logistics activities must comply;
• Personnel Employment Department (RIP), which has acquired the function of "employment" of the Officers, NonCommissioned Officers, Volunteers and enlisted personnel of the FA, skills previously carried out by the respective General Directorates; combat and for logistical support mainly oriented towards the presence and surveillance of national spaces; ISPE.L (Logistics Inspectorate): is responsible for all logistics functions including administrative and healthcare ones; The RM (Military regions) North and South, coming under the control of the Logistics Inspectorate, absorb the functions, respectively, of the North and South Area Logistics Commands while handing over the current competences as indicated below: administrative competences: to the Inspectorate logistics through the Administration Directorate; garrison skills and those connected with conscription, recruitment and mobilization: to the recruiting commands and interregional and regional completion forces; infrastructural and state-owned skills: to the Infrastructure Inspectorate, to the Area Infrastructure Commands and to the Infrastructure Departments; Manager Admin. (Administration Management): ensures the financing of administratively dependent bodies, through the availability of funds accredited by the central administration on the appropriate special accounts and the reporting of the related accounts; they carry out the legal-administrative functions devolved upon them in relation to the FA system; carries out the administrative control action towards the bodies of jurisdiction both during inspections and during the review of management documents on behalf of the central accounting of the Ministry of Defence; ISPE.RFC (Inspection for Recruitment and Completion Forces): established on the basis of the suppressed RM centre, it assumes at the national level the functions of the top body for the recruitment and completion activities of FA units, makes use of the commands subordinates (Regional RFC CDIs) to create a valid and effective interface with the youth world; Cdo Interregion.
RFC (Interregional Command for Recruitment and Completion Forces): they have the regional CRCs under their control. The interregional RFC North, Center and South Commands also carry out the functions of regional RFC Commands of Piedmont, Lazio and Sicily. the functions of the Central and Regional RFC Interregional Command are carried out by the Military Command of the Capital; Cdo RFC Reg. (Regional RFC Cdo): established upon reconfiguration of the regional military commands (CMR); ISPE.FS (Inspection for Training and Specialization): established on the basis of the reconfigured Inspectorates of Arms and Schools, it absorbs the functions connected with the training and specialization of personnel, as well as with the training and verification of CDIs and units, on the basis of their use in operations; ISPE.INFR. (Infrastructure Inspectorate): established on the basis of the Engineering Command of the Capital Command, it centralizes the functions of control and management of the Army's infrastructural assets; Cdo Infr. area (area infrastructure CDO): established following the reconfiguration of the RM Engineering Commands of the North, Center and South; Ugh. Center Gen. Administrative Manager: carries out the administrative duties devolved to the Head of SM.
48
FIGURE 4 FOLLOWS


2.3.4.2 The operational organization (fig. 6) The current structure of the Operational Forces reporting to COMFOTER (Fig. 6) is as follows:
The first two Commands were considered readily "spendable" to manage "out of area" operations, with the ability to "expand" to assume the Joint/Combined configuration, acquiring joint/multinational modular cells. Furthermore, all the tactical and logistical support units of the operational area have been placed under the Deputy Commander of the Land Forces, which include the Air Cavalry, the Artillery Brigade, the Anti-aircraft Artillery Brigade, the Engineer Brigade and the Projection Logistics Brigade.
AND OF THE OPERATIONAL AND PERIPHERAL COMMANDS OF THE ITALIAN ARMY
NUMERICAL CONSISTENCY OF THE MAIN MANAGEMENT BODIES • •
On:
- Rep. Cdo, 14th regiment. alp. and 3rd regiment. to. ter. 100% VFB/VSP powered;
• Planning, General and Financial Department (RPGF), "thinking body" of the EMS with the task of developing medium and long-term planning, based on the presumable operational scenarios of the future and, consequently, setting up programming in all sectors, consistently with the pre-established objectives and compatibly with the available financial resources; • for a total of 427 Officers, 317 Non-Commissioned Officers and 129 civilians. • The Brigade has light vehicles, particularly suitable for use in mountain environments. The main weapon systems are represented by 24 c/c TOW systems, 36 c/c MILAN systems, 123 c/c PANZERFAUST systems, 18 120 mm mortars and 108 60 mm mortars. "Julia" Brigade • ____________ the Command of the Projection Forces in MILAN (FOP): was established through the reconfiguration of the 3rd CA Command. Initially with the "Garibaldi", "Folgore", "Friuli" Brigades and some tactical, logistical and training support regiments; at the moment it does not have forces as it is being reconfigured into a Projection Army Corps Command intended for the planning and conduct of operations outside the area; the Alpine Troop Command in Bolzano (TA): also a projection unit, it was activated for the reconfiguration of the 4th CA Command and included the "Taurinense" Brigade, the "Julia" and the "Tridentina"; the 1st Defense Forces Command in Vittorio Veneto (1st FOD): also established through the reorganization of the pre-existing Command of the 5th CA, with the "Ariete", "Centauro", "Pozzuolo del Friuli" Brigades reporting to it, "Folgore" and "Friuli"; the 2nd Command of the Defense Forces in Naples (2nd FOD): obtained by enucleating some components from the RM Southem Command, it included the "Granatieri di Sardegna", "Sassari", "Garibaldi", "Pinerolo" and " Aosta".
On:
- Rep. Cdo, 6th and 11th corps. alp. fed with 15% leverage; - 5th regiment. alp. powered with 80% VFA.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it "Tridentina" Brigade To meet the needs of preparing forces and exercising Command and Control (C2) functions in "Land heavy" operations on the national territory or abroad, the Land Operational Forces Command was established in 1997 in Verona, whose Commander ( COMFOTER) coincides with the Joint Head Quarter South (JHQS) of NATO (the old FTASE command: Land Forces Southem
Europe) on which the following depend:
49
BRIGADES
FIGURE 5
FIGURE 6


The Brigade has light vehicles, particularly suitable for use in mountain environments. The main weapon systems are represented by
24 c/c TOW systems, 36 c/c MILAN systems, 123 c/c PANZERFAUST systems, 18 120 mm mortars and 108 60 mm mortars. The rgt. to. It has 24 pieces of 155/39 FH-70 and a 105/14 battery. Furthermore, for the needs associated with participation in the AMF (L) has
60 BV-206 high mobility vehicles.
Mechanic Brigade "Centaur"
On:
- Rep. Cdo, 2nd and 3rd corps. b. - 52nd regiment. to. ter. powered with 100% VFA.
On:
Rep. Cdo, 2nd, 3rd, 9th rgt. alp. and 1st regiment. to. ter. all powered with VFB/VSP at 105%. "Taurinense" Brigade The Brigade has 168 B1-CENTAURO heavy armored vehicles. The lagoon regiment is equipped with 59 VCC-2 (derived from the well-known M-113), 8 TOW c/c systems, 12 MILAN c/c systems, 41 PANZERFAUST c/c systems, 6 120 mm mortars and 36 60 mm mortars mm. The rgt. to. has 24 pieces FH-70 of 155/39.
The Brigade has 41 LEOPARD-1 A-5 tanks, 177 VCC-1 and VCC-2 (derived from the well-known M-113), 24 systems with TOW, 36 systems with MILAN, 123 systems with PANZERFAUST , 18 120 mm mortars and 108 60 mm mortars. The 11th regiment. b., 132nd regiment. to. ter. and 10th regiment. g. woe. all powered with VFB/VSP al The Brigade has light vehicles, particularly suitable for use in mountain environments. The main weapon systems are represented by
24 c/c TOW systems, 36 c/c MILAN systems, 123 c/c PANZERFAUST systems, 18 120 mm mortars and 108 60 mm mortars. The rgt. to. It has 24 pieces of 155/39 FH-70 and a 105/14 battery. The engineering regiment has means for mobility support (bridges, mine clearance, special vehicles), for countermobility (mine laying, excavators) and for deployment support.
On:
- Rep. Cdo, 4th and 5th corps. c., rgt. lag. "Serenissima" and 3rd rgt. g. woe. 100% VFB/VSP powered; - rgt. c. (2nd) powered with 15% leverage.
On:
- Rep. Cdo, 9th rgt. f., 7th regiment. b., 31st regiment. cr., 21st regiment. to. ter. powered with 115% VFA;
- 82nd regiment. f. and 11th regiment. g. woe. fed with 15% leverage.
- 7th and 8th regiment. alp. and 2nd regiment. g. woe. powered by 100% VFA. "Pozzuolo del Friuli"
The Brigade has 41 LEOPARD-1 A-5 tanks, 40 B1-CENTAURO heavy armor, 36 light armor, 118 VCC-1 (derived from the well-known M-113), 16 TOW systems, 24 MILAN systems , 82 c/c PANZERFAUST systems, 12 120 mm mortars and 72 60 mm mortars. The rgt. to. has 24 pieces M-109L 155/39. The engineering regiment has means for mobility support (bridges, mine clearance, special vehicles), for countermobility (mine laying, excavators) and for deployment support.
Mechanic Brigade "Pinerolo" ____________ Brigade c.
The Brigade has 162 C1-ARIETE tanks, in the final stage of delivery to replace the LEOPARD-1s. The Bersaglieri regiment is equipped with 59 VCC-2 (derived from the well-known M-113), 8 TOW c/c systems, 12 MILAN c/c systems, 41 PANZERFAUST c/c systems, 6
120 mm mortars and 36 60 mm mortars mm. The rgt. to. has 24 pieces M-109L 155/39.
On:
Rep. CDO, 8th and 18th Regt. b., 131st regiment. cr., rgt. c. (19th), 8th regiment. to. ter. and 21st regiment. g. woe. all powered with VFB/VSP at 115%.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
On:
Rep. Cdo, 4th, 32nd and 132nd regiments. cr. 105%.
Mechanic Brigade "Garibaldi" , 132nd Cor. Brigade "Aries"
The Brigade has 56 B1-CENTAURO heavy armor, 177 VCC-2 (derived from the well-known M-113), 24 TOW systems, 36 MILAN systems, 123 PANZERFAUST systems, 18 120 mm mortars and 108 60 mm mortars. The rgt. to. has 24 pieces M-109L 155/39. , 21st regiment. f. and rgt. c. (1st) fed with 15% leverage;
50


The Brigade has 56 B1-CENTAURO heavy armor, 177 VCC-1 and VCC-2 (derived from the well-known M-113), 24 TOW systems, 36 MILAN systems, 123 PANZERFAUST systems, 18 120 mm mortars and 108 60 mm mortars. The rgt. to. has 24 pieces FH-70 of 155/39.
On:
- Rep. Cdo, 5th and 7th corps. c.(A), 66th regiment. f. aemb. and rgt. c. (3rd) all powered with VFB/VSP at 115%; - 6th regiment. b. powered with 15% leverage.
The Brigade has 54 A-129 helicopters, 24 AB-205 helicopters, 24 AB-412 helicopters and 18 A-109 helicopters, 40 B1-CENTAURO heavy armored vehicles, 36 light armored vehicles, 59 protected VM-90s (waiting for the armored vehicles of PUMA series), 8 TOW c/c systems, 12 MILAN c/c systems, 41 PANZERFAUST c/c systems, 6 120 mm mortars and 36 60 mm mortars..
On:
- Rep. Cdo, 2nd rgt. f. G. and 1st regiment. b. fed with 15% leverage; - 1st regiment. f. G., rgt. c. (8th) and 33rd regiment. to. ter. powered with 115% VFA. "Granadiers of Sardinia"
Aemb. Brigade "Friuli"
Su Engineer Brigade : 6th Rgt. gp, rgt. g. fv. and 2nd regiment. g. pt. all powered with 100% VFB/VSP.
Mechanic Brigade The Brigade has 118 VCC-2 (derived from the well-known M-113), 16 TOW c/c systems, 24 MILAN c/c systems, 82 PANZERFAUST c/c systems, 12 120 mm mortars and 72 60 mm mortars. .
The Brigade has 18 MLRS heavy rocket launchers (5th), 48 155/39 FH-70 mechanical towed howitzers (24 per regiment) and materials for NBC detection and clearance, including 14 VAB armored vehicles equipped for NBC reconnaissance. rgt. to. has 24 pieces M-109L 155/39. The engineering regiment has means for mobility support (bridges, mine clearance, special vehicles), for countermobility (mine laying, excavators) and for deployment support.
On:
Rep. Cdo, 151st and 152nd regiments. f. all powered with VFB/VSP at 120%.
Su artillery brigade : - 5th rgt. to. ter. MLRS and 7th reg. 100% VFB/VSP powered NBC defense; - 2nd and rgt. "On horseback" (a. ter.) fueled with 100% VFA. ____________ The Brigade has 56 B1-CENTAURO heavy armor, 177 VCC-1 and VCC-2 (derived from the well-known M-113), 24 TOW systems, 36 MILAN systems, 123 PANZERFAUST systems, 18 120 mm mortars and 108 60 mm mortars. the rgt. to. has 24 pieces FH-70 of 155/39. The engineering regiment has means for mobility support (bridges, mine clearance, special vehicles), for countermobility (mine laying, excavators) and for deployment support.
Mechanic Brigade "Sassari"
The Brigade has light vehicles. The main weapon systems are represented by 24 TOW systems, 54 MILAN systems, 123 PANZERFAUST systems, 24 120 mm mortars and 98 60 mm mortars. The engineering battalion has the means to mobility support (bridges, mine clearance, special vehicles), for countermobility and for deployment support.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
On:
Rep. CDO, 5th and 62nd Regt. f., 12th regiment. b., rgt. c. (6th), 24th regiment. to. ter. and 4th regiment. g. woe. all powered with 115% VFA.
On:
Rep. Cdo, 183rd, 186th and 187th regiments. par., 9th rgt. par. ass., 185th regiment. to. RAO and 8th battalion. g. woe. all powered with VFB/ VSP at 95%.
Mechanic Brigade "Aosta"
Brigade par. "Lightning"
51
SUPPORTS


The Brigade has the HAWK (4th and 5th) missile system for area defense, as well as the SHORAD and V-SHORAD point defense materials. The 17th has the SKYGUARD-ASPIDE missile system, STINGER shoulder-fired missile and 25 mm SIDAM quad system.
The 121st is on STINGER-SIDAM.
100% VFB/VSP powered. The Battalion is divided, in addition to the cp. Cdo and S., on two cp. alpine paratroopers (three rifle platoons and one weapons support platoon for cp.).
The battalion has 16 MILAN systems, 16 PANZERFAUST systems and 8 60 mm mortars.
On:
- 5th and 17th regiments. to. c/a powered with 100% VFA;
- 4th and 121st regiments. to. c/a powered with 120% VFA.
Alpine Battalion par. "Mount Matterhom"
Anti-aircraft The helicopter units destined for training units also depend on the Command (across the entire range of helicopters).
The total personnel amounts to 6092 Officers, 15,273 Non-Commissioned Officers and 58,904 enlisted men.
Artillery Brigade - The rgt. has no. 6 ETT (AB-205/AB-212), of no. 12 ESC/EOC (AB-205/AB-212); - 28° gr. sqd. c.(A) fed with 80% leverage. It has aircraft for transport and connection to fixed-wing aircraft (n. 5 Do-228 and n. 3 P-180).
The Brigade has the floating bridges of the PFM series, materials for carrying out road works, earthmoving and for deployment support, as well as the materials necessary for the repair and management of railway lines.
3rd, 32nd and 46th regiments. t. of infrastructure fueled with 40% leverage.
Air Cavalry Command Su: - 1st rgt. c.(A) and 11th gr. sqd. c.(A) fed with VFB/VSP at 90%, 26° gr. sqd. c.(A) fed with 15% leverage.
The rgt. has no. 22 ETM (CH-47), of no. 6 ETT (AB-212/AB-412); - 4th regiment. c. (A) and 54th gr. sqd. c. (A) fed with 15% leverage, 34° gr. sqd. c.(A) fed with 80% leverage. The rgt. has no. 6 ETT (AB-205/AB-212), of no. 12 ESC/EOC (AB-205/AB-212); - 2nd regiment. c.(A) and 30th gr. sqd. c. (A) fed with 90% VFA, 20th and 21st gr. sqd. c.(A) fed with 15% leverage. ____________
On:
- 1st, 6th and 10th regiments. man., 1st, 6th 10th reg. Between. powered with VFB/VSP at 90%; - 24th regiment. man. powered with 100% VFA; - 8th regiment. Between. powered with 80% VFA.
C4-IEW Command Su: - 2nd, 7th and 11th regiments. t. of projection, 41st rgt. SAO and 33rd battalion. gu. elt. powered with VFB/VSP at 80%;
On:
1st regiment. t. and 1 rep. Army Corps CDOs powered with VFB/VSP at 95%.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it of Projection
(SOLBIATE OLONA) Logistics Brigade Transmission Brigade
2.3.4.3 The School and Training Organization (fig. 7) In the context of the reorganization of the Armed Forces, the reconfiguration of the school-training area has taken on particular importance, following both the pressing need to update the training and training cycles of the personnel, and the need to move away from the logic of an in-depth initial preparation with a few episodes of "updating", to move on to permanent training, congenial to the application of an increasingly complex and sophisticated training method.
52


• • The Training Inspector, in addition to the Inspectorate staff, employs the training bodies listed in the table below. The total personnel amounts to 2065 officers, 2136 non-commissioned officers, 9906 enlisted men and 815 civilians.
• the Army Logistics Inspectorate, responsible for all management activities, both at a central level, also through the resources of the pre-existing Logistics Corps Commands, later incorporated into Inspectorate Departments, and on the territory; the Land Operational Forces Command.
First of all, the Inspectorate for Training and Specialization (Rome) was recently established, responsible for the basic training, specialization and subsequent qualification of all Armed Forces personnel. It was established by merging the preexisting Weapons and Schools Inspectorates and directs the activity of all the Schools for Officers, Non-Commissioned Officers and Volunteers of the Army. the EMS Logistics Department, essentially responsible for policy functions, i.e. the preparation of financial planning proposals for modemization and renovation, as well as the subsequent implementation of the programs by defining the technical-operational requirements of the new materials, development, testing, technical-operational evaluation and assignment of mandates to the General Directorates responsible for procurement;
To achieve these results, both the training sector of the actual permanent service categories, and the school-training sector responsible for the qualification/specialization of all personnel of all ranks of the Army, were affected by changes.
The structure of ISPEL (fig. 8) includes: • the Logistics Inspector and his office; • a Coordination and General Support Department; • four Departments, divided into homogeneous functional areas.
In this context, it was decided to redefine the top of the Command and Control chain of the logistics organization, which sees three fundamental actors reporting to the Head of SME, each of whom has very distinct tasks and responsibilities:
Among the functional sectors of the Armed Force that have been revised the most, the logistics organization must be mentioned, which has undergone a profound transformation, from a static organization, largely territorial and aimed at well-defined employment hypotheses, to a streamlined organization, with a integrated, efficient and well-defined Command and Control chain, ready to support the multiple forms of use that can be attributed to the Armed Force today. ____________
• adherence logistics, intended for direct support of the operational component with projectable executive bodies, entrusted to the responsibility of the Commander of the Land Operational Forces; • support logistics, intended for indirect support of the entire Armed Force, operating with executive bodies located in the Motherland, whose responsibility lies with the Army Logistics Inspector.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
2.3.4.4 The Logistics Organization (fig. 8) In particular, ISPEL is responsible for identifying, procuring and assigning the resources necessary for logistical support, in operations, such as in training/stationary life, issuing the relevant Directives for the Commander of the Land Operational Forces, as well as the planning of home supplies to users. By virtue of this, the logistical organization has been divided into
two bands:
Furthermore, for coordination purposes, the Inspector makes use of the Deputy Weapons Inspectors, who coincide with the Commanders of the respective Weapons Schools.
In the new organizational structure, the Inspectorate certainly constitutes a key figure, to allow the Operational Forces to express the right capacity, in terms of efficiency, by putting in place modular capacity structures, which can be used in any eventuality, especially for interventions abroad or "outside the area", and expandable without problems, also through the insertion of support components supplied by the other FF.AA. or from allied or friendly countries.
FIGURE 8
FIGURE 7 53
ACTUAL STAFF IN THE INSPECTION AREA


Palermo and Cagliari);
• in 2001, the birth of the Army Infrastructure Inspectorate (ROMA), which absorbed responsibility for the maintenance and modemization of the entire infrastructural assets of the Army from the Military Regions. It was established through the reconfiguration of the Engineering Command of the Capital Command and has 3 Infrastructure Commands (North, Center and South) and 11 Infrastructure Departments located throughout the territory (figure 11);
• Commissariat Sector: n. 4 CERICO (Candiolo, Verona, Rome and Naples) and n. 3 SERICO (Bologna, The North (Padua) and South (Naples) Area Logistics Commands, demultiplier bodies of the Logistics Inspectorate, have the area responsibility for managing logistics activities in the area. The Heads of the TRAMAT and Commissariat Services report
to their respective executive bodies:
• in 1998, the suppression of the North West Military Region, the transformation of the North East, Tuscan Emilian and Southem Military Regions into the North, Central and South Military Regions, the reconfiguration of the Sardinia and Sicily Military Regions into Autonomous Military Commands - placed under respectively, of the Commanders of the Central and Southem Military Regions and of the Central Military Region in Command of the Capital, also reporting to the Commander of the Central Military Region (fig. 10);
Furthermore, to manage all the logistical formations of supplies (depots, warehouses), maintenance (laboratories) and transport (various types of units) in the area, 2 Area Logistics Commands were initially established (North and South), which have now merged in the Northem and Southem Military Region Commands (fig. 9).
To achieve these results, we proceeded in phases, which involved: ____________ The total personnel amounts to 1256 officers, 2157 non-commissioned officers and 2189 enlisted men.
2.3.4.5 The Territorial Organization The restructuring of the Territorial Organization has made it possible to eliminate the areas of overlap/duplication of competence deriving from the indeterminacy, in some sectors, of the three lines of command "operational", "logistics" and "territorial " and to achieve a reduction in the Command and logistical-administrative support structures.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The basis of the organization's functioning is the desire to implement logistical support that is no longer "just in case", which presupposes preparing or carrying out everything that could possibly be needed, with a great waste of resources and energy, but rather "just in time" logistical support, such as to provide only what is needed and at the desired time, making use of the most modem management systems for all sectors and for all activities, from supply to maintenance; this, with a notable saving of resources previously immobilized in the bodies present at the various links of the logistics chain.
FIGURE 12
• TRAMAT sector: Special Materials Support Regiment of Verona - Montichiari, MACRA of Piacenza, Pontieri Laboratory of Piacenza, n. 4 CERIMANT (Milan, Padua, Rome and Naples), n. 3 SERIMANT (Treviso, Palermo and Cagliari), n.
2 rgt. of TLC support (Treviso and Rome), n. 4 rgt. supportive c. Aria (Bologna, Orio al Serio, Bracciano and Viterbo), n. 2 Support Transport Companies (Padua and Naples) and n. 2 Dp. cel. gc (Giavera and Monopoli).
• the beginning of 2002, the transformation of the Northem and Southem Military Regions into Commands responsible for support logistics and the reconfiguration of the Central Military Region into the Inspectorate for Recruitment and Completion Forces. This Inspectorate, based in FLORENCE, is responsible for territorial and supervisory activities, the recruitment of all categories of personnel, as well as the establishment of a voluntary trained reserve. As demultiplier bodies in the territory, it has 3 Interregional Commands (North, Center and South) and 16 Regional Commands located throughout the territory (fig. 12);
54
FIGURE 9
FIGURE 11
FIGURE 10


The total personnel amounts to 292 officers, 160 non-commissioned officers and 1269 enlisted men.
- UCRAMM: (Office of the Administrative Responsibility Center of the Navy): carries out the administrative activities delegated to the Chief of Staff; - UGP (General Personnel Office): carries out the personnel employment function; - UPPF (Financial Planning and Programming Office).
- FIGURE 14 It is in tum divided into three regional infrastructure commands (North in Padua, Center in Florence and South in Naples) which, in tum, have dependent departments in the main regional capitals.
NAVY COMMAND ORGANIZATION EXPLANATORY NOTES - CINCNAV (Command in Chief of the naval squadron); - MARISPECOMMI (Commissariat and Administrative Coordination Inspectorate); - MARISPESAN (Health Inspectorate of the Navy); - MARIDIPART (Maritime Military Department), CMMA (Autonomous Maritime Military Command), COMAR (Navy Command): they constitute the peripheral structures of the Navy, guaranteeing connections with the local civil authorities; - NAVISPELOG (Naval Logistics and Lighthouses Inspectorate): for the unification of ISPENAV and ISPEFARI it assumes the skills of naval and logistical support, together with the control of the lighthouses and maritime sectors; - MARICOGECAP (General Command of the Port Authorities); - UIAV (Aviation Inspectorate Office for the Navy): limited to the use of anti-submarine aircraft.
Established on the basis of the Engineering Command of the Capital Command, it centralizes the control and management functions of the Army's infrastructural assets.
2.3.4.6 The Infrastructure Inspectorate (Fig. 11)
FIGURE 13 The total personnel amounts to 2441 officers, 3433 non-commissioned officers and 5667 enlisted men.
The first category of bodies includes: l the 1st Personnel Department, responsible for personnel policy, the ordering and organization of the Institutions, the staffing and organization of military and civilian personnel and the connection with the Military Representation. l the 3rd General Planning Department, divided into the following functional areas: Maritime Policy; Planning of the Naval Air Facility; Operations;
Telecommunications, Command & Control, Information Technology and Security (TEIS); l the 4th Studies, Projects, Means and Materials Department (SPMM), with technical/design skills, responsibility for the functional areas of Ship, Platform and Combat System Project and management of research and development programs within NATO, joint forces and of Armed Forces; ____________
2.3.5 The Navy
2.3.5.1 The general organization and the General Staff The general organization of the Navy is divided into a central organization (General Staff) (Fig. 13-14), an organization of operational forces and a territorial organization. The organizational structure of the recently restructured Naval General Staff is divided into bodies dependent on the Chief of Staff (CSM) of the Navy through the Deputy Chief of Staff of the Navy (SCSM) and bodies dependent on the CSM of the Navy with functional coordination of the SCSM of the Navy.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it Established on the basis of the suppressed Central Military Region in Florence, it assumes the functions of the top body for the recruitment and completion of Army units at the national level. It makes use of subordinate commands (inter-regional RFC Commands) to create an effective interface with the youth world through the Regional commands reconfigured, in tum, for the need.
2.3.4.7The Recruitment and Completion Forces Inspectorate. (Fig.12) l the 5th Submarine Department, responsible for the activities connected with the design, construction and management of the vehicles and personnel of the underwater component;
55


____________ l the Commissariat and Administrative Coordination Inspectorate (MARISPECOMMI), (Fig.15 B) responsible for the control and coordination of the logistical and administrative organization regarding fuels, lubricants, clothing, food, vehicles and barrack materials of various types; l the Health Inspectorate (MARISPESAN), with responsibilities for the Armed Forces health service, including the definition of the physical requirements for the recruitment and training of personnel and the management of facilities and medical supplies on land and on board; l the Office of the Inspector of Aviation for the Navy (UIAV), headed by a General Officer of the Air Force and which carries out liaison and coordination functions between MM and AM for the needs of the anti-submarine flight departments (in staff at 'Air Force, but with operational management by the Navy), for the training of personnel and for the management of relevant study programmes. l The Communications Office (reporting directly to the Chief of Staff) and the Financial Planning and Programming Office (reporting to the Deputy Chief of Staff) were recently created. The establishment of an Office of the Chief of Staff as the Administrative Responsibility Center of the MM is also underway.
2.3.5.2 The organization of the operational forces (Fig. 16) l the 6th Aircraft Department, which ensures specialist skills for problems related to the use of fixed and rotary wing aircraft in service in the MM; l the Office of Legal Affairs and Litigation (UAGC), responsible for dealing with legal affairs and litigation of the Navy and coordinator of activities conceming the parliamentary sector and that of justice and discipline in the context of intemational maritime law; l the Financial Planning and Programming Office (UPPF), which in particular carries out the functions of top planning body and exercises operational control of the funds allocated to the FA.
NUMERICAL CONSISTENCY OF THE MAIN MANAGEMENT BODIES The bodies with functional coordination of the Navy SCSM (Fig.13) are: l the General Office of Personnel and Schools Inspectorate, responsible for the training activity of Navy personnel and with consultancy/liaison duties with the General Directorate of Military Personnel and employment of personnel and on which the training institutes and bodies depend; (Fig.15) l the General Affairs and Extemal Relations Office (UAGRE), which is responsible for the management/coordination of activities and functions having pre-eminent extemal relevance and the promotion of the image and activity of the MM; l the Communications Office (U.COM.) responsible for defining guidelines in the information and communication sector in order to better understand the roles, tasks and problems of FA; l the Inspectorate of Naval Logistics and Lighthouse Support (NAVISPELOG), (Fig.15 A) which carries out the functions of competence in the sector of naval maintenance, management of materials, testing and acceptance of newly built vessels, definition of requirements for logistical support for naval units and aircraft, infrastructure management. The main Arsenals of the MM (Taranto, La Spezia and Augusta), the Naval Stockpile Management Center (based in La Spezia), the Joint Military Studies and Applications Center (CISAM, S. Piero a Grado, Pisa) as well as the establishing the Naval Support and Experimentation Center (CSSN, also located in La Spezia), created by the merger of the existing Permanent Commission for experiments on war material (MARIPERMAN, La Spezia), Institute for electronics and telecommunications " G.
Vallauri" (MARITELERADAR, Livomo) and MM Missile Center (MARIMISSILI, La Spezia);
AND THE OPERATIONAL AND PERIPHERAL COMMANDS OF THE NAVY
FIGURE 15 Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
FIGURE 15/B
FIGURE 15/A 56


FIGURE 16
- 3 Transport and Disembarkation Units: “San Giorgio”, “San Marco” and “San Giusto”; the Underwater Forces Command (COMFORSUB, based in Taranto), which brings together all the underwater units and the related logistical and training support structures.
The structure of the operational forces (Fig. 16) under CINCNAV (in force since 1 October 1999) is as follows:
The only exception to this concentration of operational skills is made up of the special forces (essentially, the Underwater and Incursori Group, based in Varignano, La Spezia, which due to their characteristics remain directly dependent on the Chief of Staff of the Navy). CINCNAV is also able to carry out control-level functions for joint, multinational (combined) or joint/combined operations, and could also find itself, in the event of a crisis or armed intervention, taking action (similar to its counterparts of the Army and Air Force) reporting to the CSMD as Commander of a Force (COMFOR) specifically established for a specific need and/ or having the delegation for the conduct of operations from the CSMD.
- 3 Team Refuelers: “Etna”, “Stromboli” and “Vesuvio”;
The restructuring of CINCNAV was inspired by three concepts: l coherence with the new NATO command structure, which led to the suppression of the fourth level commands, to which CINCNAV belonged as Command in Chief of the Central Mediterranean, COMEDCENT; l the concentration, at command levels dependent on CINCNAV, of all the offshore naval forces, underwater units, mine countermeasures forces, coastal forces, amphibious forces and fixed and rotary wing aircraft; l the transfer of operational functions and related means previously entrusted to peripheral territorial commands, with the exclusion of those of units operating locally for the needs of the headquarters. "Grenadier";
The naval units and departments of the MM are - in most cases - dependent, through intermediate commands, on the Command in Chief of the Naval Squadron (CINCNAV); the remaining units and departments, made up of the smaller ships for coastal use and within the naval bases and some smaller technical and logistical support bodies, are instead dependent on the territorial commands.
The embarked headquarters of CINCNAV is the light aircraft carrier Giuseppe Garibaldi, based in Taranto; the naval units and departments under it are divided into a certain number of complex commands. “Aliseo”, “Euro”, “Espero” and “Zefiro”; 2 cl. Wolf: “Perseus” and “Sagittarius”; which together constitute the 1st line units; - 4 Team patrolmen cl.
Soldiers: “Gunner”, “Airman”, “Bersagliere” e ____________ Penne: “Durand de la Penne” and “Mimbelli”;
- 10 Frigates: 8 cl. Mistral: “Maestrale”, “Grecale”, “Libeccio”, “Scirocco”, The air component dependent on COMFORAER has fixed-wing and rotary-wing aircraft. In particular: - 18 VSTOL aircraft (Harrier AV-8B-Plus and Harrier TAV-8B); - 80 helicopters (SH3D, SH3DH,
AB212 ASVV, AB212 NLA, EH101) Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The following naval units depend on COMFORAL: - 1 “Giuseppe Garibaldi” aircraft carrier cruiser; - 1 Cruiser “V.
Veneto"; - 4 Destroyers: 2 cl.
Audace: “Audace” and “Ardito”, 2 cl. Durand de la Cossato”, “Da Vinci”, “Marconi” (to be divested on 1 July), “Pelosi”, “Prini”, “Longobardo” and “Gazzana”; l Air Force Command (COMFORAER, based in S. Rosa), responsible for all fixed and rotary wing departments and the related aircraft and helicopter stations concentrated near the operational hubs of Taranto, La Spezia and Augusta. l Offshore Forces Command (COMFORAL, based in Taranto). It brings together all the front line units and the amphibious units based in Taranto and Brindisi and is subordinated to a Naval Group Command (COMGRUPNAV, based in La Spezia, including the offshore units located there) and a naval command from activate (COMGRUPNAVIT), which has a permanent operational staff capable of carrying out command and control functions for the conduct of joint or intemational operations.
The underwater component dependent on COMFORSUB has the following submarines: “Fecia di 57


“Termoli”, “Alghero”, “Numana”, “Crotone”, “Viareggio”, “Chioggia” and “Rimini”; l Command of the Coastal Patrol and Defense Forces (COMFORPAT, based in Augusta), which brings together all the second line shipping (corvettes, offshore and coastal patrol vessels) and has three subordinate commands under it.
FIGURE 17
2.3.6 The Air Force The Mine Countermeasures component dependent on COMFORDRAG is divided into the following units:
- 1 CMM Force Command and Support Ship: “Alpino”;
- 12 Minehunter Units cl. Lerici: “Lerici”, “Sapri”, “Milazzo”, “Vieste”, “Gaeta”, 17). While awaiting some ongoing measures, the Maritime Military Departments are those of the Upper Tyrrhenian Sea, based in La Spezia (MARIDIPART LA SPEZIA), of the Adriatic, based in Ancona (MARIDIPART ANCONA) and of the Ionian and Canale d'Otranto, based in Taranto (MARIDIPART TARANTO); alongside them are the Autonomous Maritime Military Commands of Sicily (also commanded by an Admiral), based in Messina (MARISICILIA), of Sardinia, based in La Maddalena (MARISARDEGNA) and of the Capital (MARICAPITALE), based in Rome. These bodies are responsible for the control of the Commands/Bodies included in their respective territories and of the naval units placed permanently or temporarily under their control, and exercise their authority in relation to specific functions (for example, Schools, Arsenals, etc.). l Dredging Forces Command (COMFORDRAG, based in La Spezia), in which all the mine countermeasures units are concentrated and the "Alpino" in its new role as a support and command and control vessel for CMM operations; this command can also generate, if necessary, a projectable complex (COMGRUPMIN) capable of fitting into a multinational context.
The Landing Force component dependent on COMFORSBARC is divided into: - 1 “San Marco” Operational Regiment; - 1 “Carlotto” Training Logistics Regiment; - 1 Landing Craft Group; which make use of the ships "San Giorgio", "San Marco" and "San Giusto" dependent on COMFORAL;
The national territory, with particular reference to the coastal regions where the naval bases and other infrastructures of primary interest for the Navy are located, falls under the jurisdiction of six Peripheral High Commands, made up of three Maritime Military Departments (MARIDIPART) and three Autonomous Maritime Military Commands (CMMA, each with its own name relating to the geographical area of interest) (Fig. the Landing Forces Command (COMFORSBARC, stationed in Brindisi), which groups together the Marine infantry units and the landing craft group; it constitutes the "Commander, Landing Force, CLF", in case of activities at a national and/or intemational level.
2.3.5.3 The peripheral/territorial organization (Fig. 17) ____________ (MARICENTADD, based in Taranto).
In the context of the projectability of air-naval forces and their full integration into joint and/or multinational naval complexes, CINCNAV is, in rotation, with the equivalent bodies of France, Spain and Portugal, operational commander of EUROMARFOR, has the responsibility for the conduct of underwater operations (Submarine Operational Authority) and carries out the functions of "Naval Supporting Commander" and "Naval Component Commander". Likewise, COMFORAL can also carry out command and control functions within EUROMARFOR, the Italian-Spanish Amphibious Force and amphibious operations ("Commander Amphibious Task Force"). Finally, as already mentioned, the Command of the Underwater and Incursors Group (COMSUBIN) remains under the control of the Chief of Staff, which maintains responsibility for the Incursors Operational Group (GOI), the Underwater Operations Group (GOS), the Schools Group and the Special Naval Group.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it Finally, the MM Aeronaval Training Center depends on the organization of CINCNAV The following units depend on COMFORPAT: -
8 Corvette cl. Minerva: “Minerva”, “Urania”, “Danaide”, “Sphinx”, Dryad”, “Phoenix”, “Chimera” and “Sibyl”;
- 2 patrol boats cl. Cigala Fulgosi: “Cigala Fulgosi” and “Borsini”;
- 4 Auxiliary Units cl. Cassiopeia: “Cassiopeia”, “Libra”, “Spica” and “Vega”.
2.3.6.1 The new military air force 58


____________ For the planning, coordination and control action in the various sectors of activity of the FA, the Head of SMA has the Air Force General Staff and, for activities with a sectoral connotation, specific staff bodies directly dependent on him (Fig. 19).
- FIGURE 19 A Starting from 1998, the AM began a process of profound structural reform. Compared to the pre-existing organization (Fig. 18) based on a territorial distribution of competences, we have gradually transitioned to an organizational structure with a distinctly functional connotation.
2.3.6.2 Air Force General Staff The central area of the FA is composed of: • General Staff, is organized into 4 Departments (Fig. 20): l the 1st "Organization and Personnel" Department is responsible for the organization of the FA and in the organic sizing of the individual components; deals with matters connected with recruitment, legal status, advancement, employment, training and economic treatment of personnel; provides legal advice and manages relations with military representatives.
FIGURE 19
FIGURE 18
AIR FORCE COMMAND ORGANIZATION EXPLANATORY NOTES The current organizational configuration of the SMA is consequent to Legislative Decree. 464/97 and does not undergo further changes.
From this perspective, therefore, the skills have been divided based on the sector of activity, identifying for each of them a single person responsible for the entire national territory. In particular, the following macro functions have been identified: training, logistical support and training. Each of them is headed by an Alto Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
- COFA (Operational Command of the Air Forces): carries out command and control functions connected with all operations/exercises of interest to the FA; - COMLOG (Logistics Command): manages all technical-operational, geotopographic, telecommunications and flight assistance services; - ISP.SV (Flight Safety Inspectorate): operates in the field of prevention, investigation and legal problems conceming the flight activity of all military aircraft; - ISPAVIAMAR Inspectorate of Aviation for the Navy (limited to technical logistics activities and professional technical training); - CGS (General Command of Schools): provides for the selection, basic and academic training, as well as basic flight training of all FA personnel; - CSA (Air Squadron Command): carries out training, preparation and technical logistics support functions for the dependent departments; - RA (Aerial Region): has competences, within its territory of jurisdiction, in the health, administrative, state property and infrastructure sectors; - UGC carries out verification and control activities on administrative matters and the efficiency of the forces; - DIPMA is responsible for the employment function of military personnel; - RGS: carries out activities relating to the security of military infrastructures.
Command (respectively Command of the Air Squadron, Logistics Command, General Command of the Schools) whose Commander (General of the Air Squadron) is placed directly under the Chief of Staff. The Chief of SMA also makes use of an Air Force Operational Command through which he can exercise operational command of the units employed in operations and exercises, if delegated to do so by the Chief of Defense Staff (Fig. 19 and 19 bis ).
59


• The General Office of the Arms Role and Offices of the Heads of the Corps (Commissariat, Health and Engineers): they are assigned a consultancy function towards the Head of SMA in matters of recruitment, training and employment of the personnel of the respective role ;
FIGURE 22
• Logistics Command (Fig. 23) divided into: 1st Division Pratica di Mare Flight Experimental Centre, 2nd Division Technical Operational Support for Aircraft, Armament and Avionics, 3rd Support Division SMA of an adequate tool in the sector of control and verification of results in terms of congruity, cost-effectiveness and adherence to the assigned tasks;
• The General Control Office: the establishment of the UGECO responds to the need to equip the Chief with Cagliari Elmas and 41st Wing of Sigonella), relating to the aspects of competence of the AM. •
• Command Area: made up of the General Staff and the direct consultancy and collaboration bodies of the High Commander; • Intermediate Level: within the Air Squadron Command (Fig. 22) the intermediate level is represented by: 1st Padua Air Brigade (missiles), 9th Pratica di Mare Air Brigade (CSAR, ESM, E CM, AAR, aerophotogrammetry), 46th Air Brigade of Pisa (Transport), Fighter-Interceptor Brigade of Bari, Fighter-Bomber/Reconnaissance Brigade of Milan, Airspace Brigade of Centocelle and General Office for Meteorology of Centocelle. Also dependent on the Air Squadron Command are: the 31st Wing of Ciampino (State Transport) and the MPA component (30th Wing of l The 3rd "Plans and Operations" Department is responsible for the general and financial planning of the FA with all related aspects; elaborates area doctrine; directs and supervises the operational and training activities of interest; deals with intemational relations and the resulting legal provisions. l The 4th "Logistics and Infrastructure"
Department is competent in the sectors of command, control and communications systems; is responsible for planning activities relating to piloted and unmanned weapon systems; manages national and intemational programs relating to the communications sector; deals with problems relating to administrative, healthcare, state property and general logistics supports, with particular reference to the activity carried out in the operational departments of the FA. l The 5th "General Affairs" Department is responsible for the collection, valorisation and dissemination of the AM's historiographical material; deals with general staff problems by ensuring the widespread dissemination of initiatives in favor of staff (agreements, special offers, etc.); is responsible for Social Protection Bodies; provides for the dissemination of FA promotional and information material; the editorial staff of the Rivista Aeronautica is located within the 5th Department; • The Directorate for the Employment of Military Personnel of the Air Force; the DIPMA is the body used by the Head of SMA for the exercise of the responsibilities assigned to him regarding the use of personnel and management of the related disputes; • The Flight Safety Inspectorate; the ISV performs the functions of a technical body for prevention, investigation, legal consultancy and specialization of personnel in the specific sector; The General Safety Department; the RGS constitutes the organizational element in the security sector with competences on everything relating to the responsibilities of the Head of SMA as the FA's Central Security Body;
Subordinate to the intermediate bodies are the peripheral bodies with expertise in the management and execution of specific activities. The structure of the High Command is divided into: ____________
2.3.6.3 Structural aspects With the establishment of the High Commands it was also necessary to review the organization of the levels immediately dependent on each High Commander; in this case, consistently with the reorganization by function instead of that by territory, the "intermediate" level was introduced to identify that range of bodies responsible for directing and coordinating the dependent elementary units.
FIGURE 21 Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
FIGURE 20
• Inspectorate for Aviation for the Navy: established under the operational dependence of the Head of SMM, it maintains a functional dependence with the Head of SMA for the aspects within the latter's competence.
60


FIGURE 24 As a police force, the force functionally depends on the Minister of the Interior and carries out judicial policing and public order and security tasks.
2.3.7.2 Military tasks The
military tasks of the Carabinieri are:
• General Command of the Schools (Fig. 24): on which the Officers' Training Division of Pozzuoli, the Higher Training Division of Florence and the Non-Commissioned Officers' Training Division of Caserta depend.
FIGURE 23 As an Armed Force, the Army has an autonomous position within the Ministry of Defense, with organizational lines that establish the dependence of the General Commander on the Chief of Defense Staff for the performance of military tasks, exactly defined by law 78/2000 . competition for the mobilization service.
2.3.7.3 The Structure (Fig. 26) Support Services Department, Health Department, 1st and 3rd Air Region (Bari and Milan) and COMAER;
In summary, the force has the rank of FA and is a police force with general competence and permanent public security service. abroad;
Operational Technician for Command and Control Systems, Commissariat Department, Infrastructure Department,
2.3.7 The Carabinieri Corps 2.3.7.1 The restructuring The characteristics, tasks, prerogatives and dependences of the Carabinieri find an essential definition today in law 78 of March
2000 and in the articles still in force of the Organic Regulations of 1934.
• security of Italian diplomatic and consular representations including that of military attachés
• assistance to commands and military units engaged in institutional activities in the national territory, ____________
- Peripheral Level. Air Force Command Area (CSA): Wings, Radar Groups, Radar Squadrons, Remotely Guided Interceptor Groups, Coordination and Control Services, National Center for Aeronautical Meteorology and Climatology, 1st Regional Meteorological Centre, Aeronautical Meteorology and Teleposition Testing Department. Logistics Command Area:
Maintenance Departments and Groups, Warehouses, Depots and units operating in the sectors of State Property, the Telecommunications Commissariat and Health. General Command Schools Area (CGS): Academy, Air War School, Flight Schools (61st Wing of Lecce, 70th Wing of Latina and 72nd Wing of Frosinone), Non-Commissioned Officers School, Training School for Non-Commissioned Officers, Recruit Training Schools, Gliding School, Direction of Extended Conscription Courses. • Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
FIGURE 25 national in cases of public disasters in accordance with the art. 1 of law 382/78; • participation in peace support operations outside the national territory; • participation in military police operations abroad and, on the basis of intemational agreements and mandates, contribution to the reconstruction of local police forces in the areas of presence of the Armed Forces. in peace support missions; exclusive exercise of military police and security functions for the Army, Navy and Air Force, as well as, pursuant to the Military Penal Codes, exercise of Military Judicial Police functions under the bodies of Military Justice;
• Air Force Operational Command (COFA) (Fig. 25) - located in Vicenza and soon to be transferred to Poggio Renatico (FE) - is identified with the Operations Center (Poggio Renatico) where the link between the chain of command and national control with NATO through the CAOC 5.
• contribution to the defense of the homeland and the safeguarding of free institutions and the good of the community 61


2.3.7.4 The General Command (Figs. 27, 28) (Technical-Logistic-Administrative) which, framed in the Interregional Commands, will ensure, by 2002, support activities for all the Departments/Commands/Units located in the territory of competence, regardless of the functional organization to which they belong.
FIGURE 29
EFFECTIVE FORCE Also as part of the reorganization of the Army, the process of establishing five TLA Groups was started
FIGURE 26 Furthermore, the Army also employs civilian personnel of various professional qualifications, in a total number of 291 units.
2.3.7.5 Technical and Administrative Logistics Groupings (RTLA) (Fig. 29) The force has a strength established by law (organic and extra-organic) of 116,345 units: 4,145 officers of the various roles, 29,936 inspectors (marshals), 20,299 superintendents (brigadiers) and 61,965 officers and carabinieri, including the contingent of 12,000 auxiliary carabinieri. The effective force is approximately 112,000 units, divided into the Central, Training, Territorial, Mobile and Special Organisations, as well as Departments for specific needs and Joint Force Organisations.
FIGURE 28 Furthermore, following the approval of the reorganization law (n. 78 of 31 March 2000) and the descending delegated decrees (n. 297 and n. 298 of 5 October 2000), the Carabinieri established the CNA in Chieti (National Administrative Center) which, placed directly under the General Command, is centralizing, with the support of IT procedures and the use - for the first time in the context of the Public Administration - of the digital signature, the economic and management of personnel records, previously devolved to 26 entities (Fig. 28). ____________
FIGURE 27 Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it For technical-administrative aspects, the Army reports to the Ministry of Defense with regards to personnel, administration and logistical activities. It reports to the Ministry of the Interior for the barracks and office fumishings connected to the tasks of protecting public order and safety, as well as for the use of financial resources aimed at strengthening the FP
2.3.7.7 The Training Organization (Fig. 30) It is the management, coordination and control structure of all institutional activities (1585 units - 1.41%). In the financial and administrative field, for the chapters of the Ministry of Defense dedicated to the "Public Security Function", exclusive to the Force, the Commander General, to whom the law attributes specific administrative and financial functions, formulates proposals for the setting of the annual budget, has faculty to make commitments on the same budget segment and is responsible for the management and results connected to the use of the allocated funds.
2.3.7.6 The barracks Of the 4,994 barracks available to the Army, only 143 (2.8%) belong to the Military State Property (mainly in use by departments of the Mobile, Training and Military Police Organizations), 865 (17.4% ) to the Civil State Property and 3,986 (79.8%) are rented by local administrations or private individuals, with the rent paid by the Ministry of the Interior.
62


• The territorial organization also includes the nine squadrons operating in Sardinia and the two helicopter-bome "Hunters" squadrons of Calabria and Sardinia, for the control of inaccessible areas, and 164 patrol boats, assisted by the Underwater Carabinieri. • It absorbs 87,720 units (78.19%) and has an extremely widespread framework: 5 Interregional Commands headed by Army Corps General, 19 Regional Commands entrusted to Division General/Brigadier General, 102 Provincial Commands (attributed to Colonel /Lieutenant Colonel), 10 Group Commands (assigned to Lieutenant Colonel), 536 Companies (commanded by Captains), 10 Lieutenants and 4,658 Stations (commanded by Marshals). An ordering maneuver is underway which provides for the elevation of other Stations to Tenenze and some Companies to Groups.
The Cuirassier Regiment (285 units), which has the prerogatives of Guard of Honour, security and escort to the Head of State; the "Tuscania" Parachute Regiment (478 units), employed in military tasks, including operations abroad. The Regiment, currently part of the Army's "Folgore" Parachute Brigade, will soon transition to the 2nd Carabinieri Mobile Brigade, according to methods currently being defined with the Defense and Army General Staff; the Carabinieri Department at the Defense General Staff (153 units); the SME Autonomous Carabinieri Group, the Carabinieri Units and Sections at the Large Army Units and the bodies of the joint industrial area (900 units), which carry out military police and security tasks in favor of the SMD and the Army;
2.3.7.8 The territorial organization (Fig. 31):
FIGURE 30 It reports to an Army Corps General and includes the Schools for basic training and professional updating of the personnel of the various roles (an Officers School, a Marshals and Brigadiers School, a Carabinieri Cadet School and two Cadet Schools Auxiliary Carabinieri - 5384 units, including students (4.8%).
FIGURE 32 ____________
• the Mobile Units Division (6,868 units - 6.12%), divided into two Mobile Brigades. The 1st Mobile Brigade, based in Rome, includes 11 Battalions and the Horse Regiment, dedicated to public order services, participation in Civil Protection and support for the Territorial Army in controlling the territory. The 2nd Mobile Brigade, established last September 15th in Livomo, includes the 2 Regiments of Laives and Gorizia, which have military tasks, in operations outside the area and in contributing to public order, and the GIS - Special Intervention Group - for decisive actions in high-risk situations. • The Specialized Units Division (4,229 units
- 3.77%), made up of highly qualified departments for the protection of particularly sensitive collective interests:
Health (NAS), Environment (NOE), Cultural Heritage (TPC), Labor (Labour Inspectorate ), Agricultural Policies (NAC), Anti-Counterfeiting. The Specialized Units Division also includes the Carabinieri Commands of the Bank of Italy and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, as well as the Scientific Investigations Group (Ra.CIS) with 4 Departments and 29 provincial Sections as well as the Helicopter Group with 91 aircraft, located in 15 Cores; The ROS (Special Operational Group, 1,134 units - 1.01%) for the development of complex investigations into organized crime, subversion and intemational terrorism. • Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
2.3.7.9 The Mobile and Special Organization (Fig. 32). It reports to the "Palidoro" Mobile and Specialized Units Command, headed by the Army Corps General, (12,231 units - 10.9%) on which the following depend: •
FIGURE 31 •
2.3.7.10 Departments for specific needs include:
63


2.3.7.12 Personnel for military tasks Today, therefore, 4,935 Carabinieri of various ranks are dedicated to exclusive or prevalent military tasks. Furthermore, the entire Territorial Organization contributes to the fulfillment of military tasks.
In a nutshell, the Army dedicates 89% (around 100,000 units) of the overall force to operational tasks, while 11% (around 12,000 units) carries out training activities (around 3,400 units - 3%) and support activities (approximately 8,700 units - 8%).
2.4 The definition of “missions” • Furthermore, the Corps performs the functions of military judicial police with the departments of the Territorial Organization and within the Armed Forces, as well as with units directly assigned to the offices of the Court of Appeal, the Courts and the Military Public Prosecutor's Offices. •
2.3.7.11 The departments for the central bodies Staff of the Force, finally, are included in the central bodies of Defense (Cabinet of the Minister of Defense, General Staff of Defense, Joint Forces Summit Operational Command, Center for Advanced Studies for Defense and General Management of Military Personnel), for a total of 126 units, and of the Ministry of the Interior (Office for the Coordination and Planning of Police Forces, Central Protection Service, Central Criminal Police Directorate, Anti-Mafia Investigation Directorate, Central Directorate of Anti-Drug Services and Police Force Training School) for a total of 954 units.
Further employment of Officers and Marshals of the Force is implemented in the Offices of Defense Attachés at the Italian Diplomatic Representations abroad provided for by Legislative Decree 297/2000. In this regard, the General Command's proposal on the possibility of filling some positions of specific interest is being examined by the SM of Defence, starting from the next rotation planning. the Carabinieri Command for the Navy, divided into a CC MM Group in Rome, with 4 Companies and 30 Stations reporting, and a Carabinieri Security Agency Department of the SMM with 8 Interregional Agencies, for a total of
857 units; the Carabinieri Command for the Air Force, divided into a Carabinieri Department General Security Department AM and three CC AM Groups, one for each Air Region (Milan, Rome and Bari), with 10 Companies and 61 Stations reporting, for a total of 809 units; • Commands and Departments at allied military bodies in Italy and abroad (RICA, Italstaff, Italdelega, SHAPE, Allied Joint Forces Command of the South, Afsouth, Navsouth, NATO Defense College, Setaf, NSE at NATO JHQ in Madrid, NATO JSRC Center in Heidelberg, CC SATCOM unit of Lunghezzano - VR and CC SATCOM fixed post of S. Agostino (VT), for a total of 575 units.
In essence, the MSUs are particularly suitable for conducting investigative activities or police interventions as well as exercising control of the territory and providing assistance and training to local police forces, as has recently been requested in Bosnia.
In particular, the Minister of Defense pro-tempore, in December 1998, in Brussels, had approved, together with colleagues from the Alliance, the "NATO Ministerial Guidance 1998" which recommended the need to resolve the military deficiencies of the forces assigned to NATO in the sectors :
• intelligence and surveillance; • command and control;
After the recent attacks against the United States, MSU's tasks have already been extended to the search and capture of terrorists and war criminals. ____________ Initially established to compete with the military forces in theater and the local or United Nations police forces in maintaining public order and security, the MSUs quickly acquired the tasks of information gathering and criminal investigation, filling as well as the shortcomings of local police structures.
For the record, we cite the intention to match - with the "ministerial directive" - the "Ministerial Guidance" which the Defense Ministers of the Alliance approve every two years and which represents the political directive for the subsequent planning activity of the Military Authorities of NATO in the medium term.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it In fact, the "Multinational Specialized Units" (MSU) have found a formal provision in allied joint forces publications and their model has been adopted by the European Union as a reference for the establishment of integrated police units, intended to deal with the civil aspects of the management of intemational crises.
When the restructuring had reached an advanced level of implementation, precisely at the beginning of 1999, the protempore Minister of Defense issued the first "ministerial directive" drawn up by the Defense General Staff and submitted for its approval.
The compliance of the outlined structure with the needs is being examined by the General Staff of the Army, the Navy and the Air Force with the aim of updating the overall force levels, taking into account the increasingly significant use of the Carabinieri in peacekeeping operations abroad.
2.4.1 Introduction 64


The "Directive" should have been updated every two years, i.e. in January 2001.
Second mission Safeguarding the Euro-Atlantic spaces, within the framework of the strategic and/or vital interests of the country, through the contribution to the collective defense of NATO.
This mission finds its foundation in the agreements signed and ratified by Parliament relating to NATO and in the statements of the new Strategic Concept of the Atlantic Alliance, signed in Washington in 1999. mass (WMD);
In summary, the "1999 Ministerial Directive" was supposed to constitute the first national attempt to set up the subsequent planning activities of the Armed Forces on the authoritative basis of upstream directives issued by the Minister.
It derives directly from the constitutional provisions and was developed through the reunification of the pre-existing Armed Forces missions relating to the defense of the national territory. It should be highlighted that the reference to the integrity of the national territory and the security and freedom of the communication routes does not limit the action to defend the vital interests of the country to the classic forms of threat only, but can be extended to the most recent forms of asymmetric conflict such as defense against terrorist attacks or the use of weapons of mass destruction.
• increase in interoperability and cooperation capabilities between NATO forces and partner countries; • maintaining adequate levels of the military budget.
• the integrity of the national territory understood as a land platform, airspace and territorial waters; • the security and freedom of communication routes; • the security of areas of national sovereignty and of compatriots abroad.
• projectability of forces (strategic transport, autonomy and logistical sustainability); • active and passive measures and deterrence capabilities against the risk and threat of weapons of destruction Defense of the country's vital interests against any possible aggression, in order to safeguard: ____________
2.4.2 The Missions These are, therefore, missions which, without prejudice to the tasks of the Armed Forces established by Law 331/2000, may be susceptible to variations depending on the changed global strategic scenario.
First mission Fourth mission Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it Therefore the "ministerial directive" and the "strategic concept", issued in times following the restructuring produced by the various Legislative Decrees, could not constitute the logical prerequisite for the formation of the new Italian defensive instrument. They were therefore translated into indications for the use of the tool and as ideas for improvements to be made to the structure during construction. Hence the definition of "missions", to be understood as the translation of the legislative norms into the national and intemational reference framework and therefore implementing the directives of the national security policy.
The third mission arises from a specific political will, constantly confirmed over the last twenty years and formalised, in fact, with the 1999 Ministerial Directive which led the Armed Forces to participate in prevention and management actions of crises decided by the UN , or in any case inspired by the principles enunciated by the United Nations Charter, according to three possible methods of intervention: • in the role of "Lead Nation" (for example, Operation "ALBA"); • as a Force forming part of a Coalition (such as NATO, the EU and the WEU); • following bi-multilateral agreements (Technical-Military Mission in Malta).
From the "directive" an implementation document, called "strategic concept", was to be issued by the Chief of Defense Staff, which was issued on 28 December 2000.
Third mission Management of intemational crises. Participation in crisis prevention and management operations, in order to guarantee peace, security, stability and intemational legality, as well as the affirmation of fundamental human rights, in the spirit of the United Nations Charter, within the framework of intemational organizations and/or bi-multilateral agreements, with particular regard to the autonomous European crisis management capacity.
65


radio assistance on smaller airports; ‚ Directly borrowed from the provisions of the law, reiterated in the professional legislation (Law 14 November 2000, n. 331 previously cited). •
2.4.2.1 Management of intemational crises As part of the activities envisaged by the 3rd mission, Italy has carried out an intense cooperation policy aimed at promoting regional stability. ‚ These same capabilities are also required for the vast range of operations included in the third mission. Since this is characterized by an extreme variability of operational situations, it is necessary that the capabilities are scalable in the application of military force. With respect to the fourth mission it should be underlined that the FF.AA. they will not have to acquire specific skills, as those already possessed will be used, respecting the peculiarities of use.
1 The capabilities considered fundamental, also on the basis of the commitments made to meet the Headline Goal (20 November 2000) are: timely availability of forces, interoperability, ability to operate in multinational contexts, deployment and mobility, C4ISR, precision and lethality of engagement , logistical sustainability, survivability and force protection.
The missions in which our forces have taken or take part are essentially of four types:
Finally, to conclude the review of the tasks that the FF.AA. they should perform, the so-called extemal functions must be remembered, i.e. those not directly connected with the performance of the institutional tasks of Defence. However, these are needs regulated by laws or decrees, characterized by undoubted public utility and in which the FF.AA. they provide, "compatibly with the technical capabilities of the staff and the means supplied, their contribution in the fields of public utility and environmental protection" (Legislative Decree no. 464/97, art. 5).
• the decommissioning of unexploded war remnants; the hydrographic service; the lighthouse and maritime signaling service;
• peacekeeping in the classical sense; • police missions in support of peace-building or stabilization operations; • stabilization missions following peace-building operations; • intemational assistance missions. the contribution to the water supply of the smaller islands territorially incorporated into the regions with special statute, upon the occurrence of the conditions of particular necessity envisaged by the specific program agreements defined with the Regions involved (MM); state civil air transport (AMI); air transport for the rescue of seriously ill and traumatized patients (EI, MMI, AMI, CC); rescue and assistance during natural disasters; • Already in the first half of the 1990s, Italy was the second country contributing troops to all the operations under UN mandate and the same financial contribution to the ordinary budget is the fifth in importance, in addition to that dedicated to the 17 current missions directly managed by the UN. ____________ • Contribution to the safeguarding of free institutions and carrying out specific tasks in circumstances of public calamity and in other cases of extraordinary necessity and urgency. •
• contributions to the Italian Red Cross for the functioning of the auxiliary military corps of the Armed Forces and the Volunteer Nurses Corps. ‚ The four missions require a set of considerable skills to accomplish. By their nature, the first two missions constitute the most onerous commitment and the available capabilities allow the spectrum of expected needs to be satisfied (1).
• fire prevention;
In fact, Italy is the third country in the world, after the USA and the United Kingdom, in terms of overall contribution to military operations in support of peace, including participation in missions directly managed by the UN and presence in multinational operations mandated by the UN. ‚ The main of these extemal functions include: • The Italian contribution to peace support missions under the aegis of the United Nations has always been significant.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it •
• the adaptation of services for civil air traffic in military airports open to civil traffic e Italian participation in the UN missions United Mission for the Referendum in Westem Sahara (MINURSO);
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL);
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO);
United Nations Iraq - Kuwait Observation Mission (UNIKOM);
66


2.4.2.2 Multinational formations with Italian participation - General The Italian Armed Forces, in recent years, have established collaborative relationships with numerous nations in order both to improve the existing ties in the economic and cultural sectors and to encourage the inclusion of some of them in the European context and the modemization of their Armed Forces. All in light of the principle of safeguarding peace and coexistence between peoples. • SEEBRIG (South Eastem Europe Brigade) Since July 1999, an Italian Officer has been part of the Planning Element as SO/G3 Plans and Training.
Italian participation in other intemational missions ‚ Albania, Bulgaria, FYROM, Greece, Italy, Romania and Turkey participate in this great Unity (Croatia, Slovenia and the USA as observers).
SHIRBRIG was partially used, without Italian participation, in the UNMEE mission (Ethiopia-Eritrea). • EAG (European Air Group) ‚ TIPH2; Israel, January 1997; ‚ KFOR-COMMZWEST, Albania, September 1999;
AMBER FOX, FYROM, September 2001;
ENDURING FREEDOM, October 2001.
The headquarters of the Command will subsequently be moved, with a four-year rotation period, to CONSTANZA (Romania), ISTANBUL (Turkey) and KILKIS (Greece). ‚ UNMIBH-IPTF, Bosnia and Herzegovina, May 1997; ‚
• SHIRBRIG (Stand-By High Readiness Brigade for United Nations Operations) ‚ There are also other types of missions of a national nature, the effects of which however affect the multidimensional security of various European partners. They are of two types: assistance missions (DIE) and missions to prevent illegal immigration (including ALBANIA 2). These missions have the main purpose of promoting the development of democracies in the process of consolidation, which are still easily vulnerable to the effects of transnational organized crime.
The training was bom on a Danish initiative to provide the Security Council with a trained and coordinated tool for interventions in peace operations. ____________ ‚ ‚ United Nations Military Observers Group India and Pakistan (UNMO GIP); United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK); United Nations Mission Ethiopia - Eritrea (UNMEE); United Nations Organization Mission in Democratic Republic of Congo (UNOMC).
The most important initiative in the SEDM (Southem European Defense Ministerial) context concems the establishment of the Multinational Peace Force South Eastem Europe (MPFSEE), whose operational unit is called the South Eastem Europe Brigade (SEEBRIG).
The Command is based in COPENHAGEN.
SFOR-JOINT FORGE, Bosnia-Herzegovina December 1996; ‚ Italy contributes with a framework infantry regiment and combat support and combat service support units which will be assigned depending on the type of mission.
The European Air Group (EAG) was bom on a Franco-British initiative and established at the end of 1995 on the basis of a declaration by the two Defense Ministers (LONDON Declaration of 27 June 1995) which was followed by an Intergovemmental Agreement in 1998.
KFOR-JOINT GUARDIAN, Kosovo, June 1999; ‚ The SHIRBRIG is a UN rapid reaction brigade, created with the collaboration of several European and nonEuropean countries, such as: Argentina, Austria, Canada, Denmark, Finland, Italy, Holland, Norway, Poland, Romania, Sweden.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it ‚
MISSIONS/OPERATIONS IN PROGRESS AS OF 4.12.2001 In December 1998, Italy expressed its willingness to participate in the initiative with a contribution of forces equal to a framework unit centered on a basic weapon regiment plus combat, combat service support and military police modules.
67


Portugal and Spain, whose Command is located in Florence.
2.4.2.3 Italian participation in the new structure of NATO forces - The Land Project The EAG improves interoperability between the respective air forces for operations to protect common interests, including "PETERSBERG missions" and excluding operations falling under the art. 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty. The EAG, as a planning group, has no assigned forces.
The MLF is a multinational formation at Brigade level bom from a political-military initiative undertaken by Italy, Hungary and Slovenia at the end of the 1990s and intended to carry out Petersberg missions.
From October 2000 to 2 April 2001 important parts of the Command and the General Staff were used in Albania to carry out the task of Command of the Communication Zone West, as part of the NATO JOINT GUARDIAN operation.
From this perspective, the proposal satisfies four fundamental and essential requirements:
The SIAF was established with the aim of having an amphibious force with high operational capabilities to support the Amphibious Forces that normally operate in the European Theater (the Anglo-Dutch Amphibious Force and the US Amphibious Group), with a distinctly Mediterranean character. It is included among the Forces available for NATO and the European Union. Participate in the Amphibious Initiative an infantry regiment.
High operational readiness maritime force resulting from the initiative of the four Latin European countries (Italy, Spain, Portugal and France). Today it constitutes a credible Force fully capable of operating in the missions envisaged by the PETERSBERG declaration.
European together with the Anglo-Dutch Amphibious Force and the French Marine Infantry Brigade.
• EAI (European Amphibious Initiative) The Command is assumed on a rotational basis by one of the four countries and the Italian CINCNAV carries out this role
On 20 April 1999, a MoU was signed which regulates the general terms and conditions for the exchange of personnel, the bodies necessary for the functioning of the Force as well as the criteria for assignment and rotation of the Command.
• EUROFOR (European Force) The Navy contributes in terms of permanent command structures with characteristics ____________ by an Italian Admiral.
Italy has participated in the Group's activities since 1997 and has been formally a full member since 14 May 2000.
Germany, Spain, Belgium and the Netherlands decided to join in July '99 and was subsequently formalised.
• MLF (Multinational Land Force) Italy has invested significant resources in the EUROFOR project: from the entire HQ unit (around 300 units) to an "on call" transmission unit for exercises or real use for the first two years (1997-1999). Furthermore, all the materials to make the Force's SM projectable were provided - a task fully addressed by the EMS.
Italy has put forward a proposal, arising from the belief that the Southem region, given its proximity to crisis areas (Balkan peninsula), is the least served in terms of NATO military presence, both in terms of number of forces and operational capabilities .
• SIAF (Spanish Italian Amphibious Force) The Command Framework of the Unit is provided by B. alp. "Julia" (Udine) and each country contributes with
• EUROMARFOR (European Maritime Force) The Spanish Italian Amphibious Force was activated on 23 November 1998 in BARCELONA.
The initiative aims to increase European amphibious capacity through close cooperation and a progressive increase in interoperability between the amphibious forces already existing in Europe. In particular, the Anglo-Dutch Amphibious Force, the SIAF and the French Marine Infantry Brigade will contribute to this large amphibious unit. function since mid-September 2001.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The Force Command rotates every two years between the two Nations; He has been detained since October 2000 Land force that can be used up to Division level in which France, Italy, multinationals, 1st line, amphibious and specialist naval units, aircraft and landing forces.
68


Contribution of Forces and Commands to be affiliated to the HRF (L) IT Contribution of forces in addition to the consolidated one to the ARRC and the AMF(L), of the order of a Division Command, four Brigades and supports, from " affiliate" to the Italian "framework" Reaction Command (Solbiate Olona) or to one of the "new" HRF(L) HQs.
IRF: Immediate Reaction Forces * * l Availability: to contribute to the establishment of HRF (L) HQ, the Projection Forces Command is made available as a C2 structure to be "redeveloped" into an Army Corps Command on a national basis "framework", with the "core" of Command and Control systems, command support units and logistics and combat support structures.
This contribution will be placed "under NATO command" and will also be usable in the context of European-led operations. l Proximity: the proposed HQ will be located in Solbiate Olona (MI), in an area therefore close to the areas of possible crises (Southem flank of NATO) and easy to access by land, air and sea.
ARRC: Rapid Reaction Corps Contribution of the Navy - an Admiral in the role of Maritime Component Commander (MCC); - a staff on board with a permanent multinational core, for the support function of the Maritime Component Command (MCC staff/ sea based); - the light aircraft carrier Garibaldi as the headquarters platform of the Maritime Component Command.
The command and control capabilities of the Garibaldi will be enhanced to ensure the standards defined within NATO.
When the Garibaldi is unavailable, the Etna team support and supply unit will be used, already designed to embark the MCC staff and to carry out the functions of the embarked command and control headquarters ship. peacetime, particularly for training, planning and operational evaluation.
HRF: High Reaction Forces The naval project is based on the availability of the GARIBALDI ship, the platform intended to embark the
HRF (M) HQ.
Contribution to the Forces at Lower Readiness (FLR) **** To ensure support for long-duration missions for the conduct of crisis management operations (CRO), the following have been made available, with reaction times of 180 days: - a Division Board of Directors; - a Brigade. l Multinationality: command at Army Corps level, made up of a staff with national personnel, open to multinationality (participation of the Nations of the Southem flank of NATO is particularly hoped for). l Assignment to
NATO: the availability to transit, if necessary, under NATO Command also in FRL: Low Operational Readiness Forces
- The Naval Project. ____________ The force complex intended for the Immediate Reaction Forces (IRF) is at regimental level (focused on the "Cuneense"
Contingent) reinforced by combat support and combat service support components, assigned to the Allied Mobile Force (AMF)L.
An Alpine regiment (5th Regiment of the B. Alp. "Julia") is available to the NATO Composite Force (NCF), a multinational formation (IT, USA, GE and PL) destined to operate in Northem Norway. **** Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it Contribution to the Immediate Reaction Forces (IRF) *** and to the NATO
COMPOSITE FORCE (NCF). *** Contribution to the NATO Rapid Reaction Forces (ARRC) ** Contribution to the ARRC to the UK "framework" (HRF HQ UK - located in Germany):
- a Division Command (integrating Portuguese personnel and units) to focus on the current 2nd Defense Operational Forces Command; - 4 Brigades;
- specialist, tactical and logistical supports; - a battlegroup level unit for the ARRC's Rear Area Security Force (RASF) Brigade. ** 69


The NATO Command and Control system for the management of the Air Forces Static entities (CAOC - Combined Air Operation Center and ARS - Air Picture Production Sensor Fusion Post) and mobile entities (DCAOC - Deployable CAOC and DARS - Deployable ARS) within the program Air Command and Control System (ACCS) .
On the subject of Joint Force Capabilities, Italy has made our Joint Forces Operational Command of Centocelle available as a "framework" for a command at a strategic level, to be integrated with multinational elements if called upon to carry out the role of Operation Command.
The overall contribution of the Army includes: • an Army Corps Command or, altematively, a Division Command;
The Air Force forces assigned to NATO are under the Operational Command of SACEUR.
The Air Force, within the Air project which sees the FA inserted in the renewed Command and Control structure of the NATO air forces (ACCS) since peacetime, plans to have an Aeronautical Instrument: • organic and well integrated with the others; l diversified and balanced in its various components; l limited in size by available resources.
2.4.2.4 The Italian contribution to European Defense The Italian contribution, formally reported in the Forces Catalogue, is of great importance and is consistent with that of the major European contributors.
- The Aeronautical Project. - The project has already been selected by NATO, like the Spanish and British ones.
AM's contribution to NATO forces - 30 F-104 aircraft -
16 Tomado ADV aircraft
- 40 Tomado IDS aircraft
- 48 AMX aircraft
- 16 C130/G222 Tactical Transport aircraft
- 6 HH3F rescue helicopters - 8 maritime patrol aircraft - 2 Tanker aircraft - 7 SWORD missile batteries
3 NIKE batteries These forces, which amount to approximately 22,000 men, from which to draw the units necessary to carry out any "Petesberg" type mission, would not be used at the same time but give the necessary flexibility in order to calibrate the commitment of the Army which it will be able to achieve, in complex, a maximum sustainable limit over time of approximately 13,000 men. ____________ • At the national level, Command and Control systems (SICCAM) and systems that can be rapidly redeployed in crisis management or in sensitive operations and with the ability to integrate with NATO systems (Mobile Command and Control Field Group - C2M, Mobile Radar) have been developed . In order to increase the surveillance capacity of the national/NATO airspace, the possibility of integrating radar sensors with passive sensors for distant threat detection is being evaluated. • Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it •
• maneuver forces, including four brigades, two of which are mechanized, one light and one airbome, two of which can be used simultaneously for long-term operations.
Italy participates directly in the composition of these entities with human resources, infrastructure and means (aircraft, radar sensors, communications) and is the host nation for some of these entities (CAOC, ARS, DCAOC). the necessary tactical and logistical support represented by regimental-level transmission, engineering, artillery, logistics and medical units;
70


The Air Force contributes a significant quantity of air and missile assets.
Italian guide;
For the Navy the contribution consists of a land-based or embarked Maritime Component Command (MCC). The embarked MCC will make use of the specific support of CINCNAV for specialized tasks such as the management of Maritime Space and for Maritime Air Operations (Water Space Management and Maritime Air Operation Centre).
- 1 Supply Ship
50 Aircraft + 2 SAM Systems • The contribution of the Navy
- 1 MCM (Mine Counter Measures) Command Unit
8 Tomado + 18 AM-X l TRANSPORT 13 C130/G222 l
SUPPORT •
- 1 Submarine
- 1 Oceanographic Vessel -
6 airplanes
- 16 helicopters
3 MPA + 2 B-707 + 6HH3F l SAM SYSTEMS 2 Sword
- 2 Amphibious Units
- Special Forces Units The contribution of the Carabinieri ____________
- 3 Frigates
THE ARMY'S CONTRIBUTION
- 4 offshore patrol boats AM's contribution to the European Union
1 Military Police Platoon (33 units) for the needs of the intemational MP battalion; • Military Police cells in the General Staff of the Army Corps or in the Italian-led Division;
The naval component includes a Task Group integrated by elements of Specialist Forces (amphibious forces, mine warfare, submarines, fixed and rotary wing aircraft) and Special Forces.
- 4 Mineslayers the attack
1 MP Company for the needs of the national brigades.
- 1 Aircraft Carrier
- Marine Infantry Battalion The Carabinieri contributes to the Police Planning Unit within the Directorate General for Extemal Relations of the General Secretariat of the Council of the European Union. The unit represents an important tool that can further evolve and strengthen itself to respond to the growing commitments according to the assessments of the Secretariat and the Committee for Civil Aspects of Crisis Management (CIVCOM).
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
- 1 Destroyer The contribution offered by the Air Force reflects the quantity of forces made available to NATO as Reaction Forces and represents a balance between combat and support capabilities with adequate STO (Survive To Operate) capabilities. The contribution includes a static command and control system (CAOC) and a mobile one which includes a CAOC, a CRC (Report and Control Centre) and a mobile radar.
• 150 units for the establishment of an intemational Multinational Specialized Unit (MSU) Regiment a 71


____________ The Integrated Police Units of the European Union will therefore be capable of rapid deployment, flexible and interoperable with the military component, autonomous from a logistical point of view, expressly inspired by the experiences gained with the MSUs.
The participation of the force in the European commitment involves the sustainable and continuous use of 800 men, of which 200 are rapidly deployed, destined to hold positions both as individual experts and as organic components of integrated police units.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it Beyond the quantitative aspects, this offer is mainly qualified by the provision of three framework commands at Brigade/Regiment level, one of which is rapid deployment, which will provide the supporting structure on which to insert the modular contributions offered by other Member States.
72


In order to proceed with the technical-financial processing, these expenses are further divided into expenses bound "to laws" and bound "to programs".
- personnel, relating to the costs to be bome for the salaries and allowances of military personnel in permanent service, of civilian personnel with continuous employment relationships, for the economic treatment of conscript personnel as well as for the temporary retirement treatment of military personnel; - exercise, relating to the costs necessary to guarantee the functionality and efficiency of the military instrument (expenses for education and training, for the maintenance and support of vehicles, materials and infrastructures, for the functioning of the Commands/Bodies/Departments) ; - investment, relating to the costs necessary to improve the effectiveness of the military instrument (expenses for the modemization and renewal of operational means, technical-logistic support and infrastructure and for research and development).
The first two sectors (personnel and operations) determine the costs relating to the "functioning" of the Armed Forces, while the last concems the acquisition of durable goods, which in tum produce security and technological progress.
Expenses bound "to laws" are those that are mandatory in that they are determined, also in their extent, by legal provisions and/or by govemment resolutions. These charges are subject to automatic mechanisms that make them particularly rigid precisely because they are linked to laws and/or inter-ministerial or intemational agreements. They may also include particular needs oriented towards public utility services such as, for example, the water supply of the smaller islands, activities in favor of civil aviation, state civil air transport and for the rescue of seriously ill and traumatized patients.
3.2 Budget preparation Spending forecasts are drawn up on the basis of the objectives and indications provided by: - Govemment, with the Economic and Financial Planning Document (DPEF); - Minister of Economy and Finance, with the annual Circular relating to budget forecasts; - Minister of Defence, in relation to the financial hypothesis to be used as a reference (percentage ratio to be ensured between Defense Budget/GDP and Defense Function/GDP) and with the Investment Planning Document; - Chief of Defense Staff, with the "Directive for the preparation of the expenditure forecast".
3.1 ARTICULATION OF DEFENSE COSTS The expenses linked to "programmes" are those intended to ensure the functionality, efficiency and effectiveness of the military instrument and derive from the programmatic choices identified by the General Staff, the General Secretariat of Defense and the General Command of the Carabinieri ( called Top Planning Bodies of the Armed Forces and Joint Forces - OP) and approved by the Chief of Defense Staff.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
3.2 BUDGET FORMATION 3.3 TIME
SERIES 3.4 COSTS 3.5
CONCLUSIONS/CONSIDERATIONS
3.1 Breakdown of Defense expenses The financial resources assigned to Defense are divided based on their destination into: - expenses for the Defense Function relating to the fulfillment of the purely institutional tasks devolved to the three Armed Forces (Army, Navy and Air Force); - expenses for the Public Security Function allocated to meet the needs of the Carabinieri; - expenses for Extemal Functions devolved to satisfy particular needs, regulated by Laws or Decrees, which are not directly connected with the institutional tasks of Defence; - expenses for provisional pensions relating to the payment of temporary retirement benefits to military personnel in the auxiliary position (period following termination from active service during which the soldier may be retained or recalled to service).
Subsequently, for the preparation of the budget, the expenses are divided into three distinct "sectors": ____________
PART III
THE ECONOMY 73


Among the historical series that can be obtained from the Defense accounting framework, those that compare military spending with gross domestic product (GDP) and the state budget are considered particularly significant.
TABLE 4
TABLE 4 EUROS
3.3 The historical series Before the start of the parliamentary discussion of the financial provisions (Budget and Finance Bills and related measures) the Defense General Staff prepares and transmits it to the Minister's Cabinet, for the Minister's approval and subsequent forwarding to the parliamentary commissions , the "Additional Note to the Defense Forecast" through which the Minister of Defense illustrates to Parliament the aims and objectives that his Dicastery intends to pursue.
Following the approval of the Budget Law, the "Expenditure Forecast for the financial year" is drawn up.
TABLE 3 BILANDIFE subsequently proceeds with the drafting of the budget project in technical-financial terms and, after the approval of the Minister, following the opinion of the Superior Council of the Armed Forces, transmits it to the State General Accounting Office for the relevant assessments and subsequent presentation at the headquarters govemmental and parliamentary (Budget Bill).
The following Tables 3 and 4 show the time series and related graphs of Defense expenditure broken down according to their functional destination (Defense Function, Public Security Function, Extemal Functions, Provisional Pensions).
They are prepared by the Central Office of Budget and Financial Affairs (BILANDIFE) and by the Defense General Staff on the basis of the proposals and data processed by the OPs and then submitted for approval by the Head of SMD who, having consulted the Committee of Heads of State Major, sends the project to the Minister for approval.
TABLE 2 ____________ This situation is reflected in the decreasing trend of the Defense budget/GDP ratio (Table 2) where, compared to an average GDP growth over the decade of 1.9%, in real terms, the impact on GDP went from 1.7% in 1991 to 1.47% in 2001.
TABLE 1 Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it In the aforementioned period, however, the budget figures although they continued to increase in monetary terms - from 12,636 million. Euros (24,466 billion) at 17,777 million. Euros (34,421 billion), + approximately 40% - in real terms they have in fact only contained the inflationary effects of the decade.
TABLE 5
Table 1 shows the data relating to the period 1991-2001 from which it can be seen that defense expenditure represented, as an average value, 3.2% of state expenditure and 1.5% of GDP.
With reference to the first of these functions, i.e. the expenses relating to satisfying the needs of the three Armed Forces, from the historical series and graphs in Tables 5 and 6 it is possible to detect the decreasing trend up to 1995, and from 1996 to 1999, of the incidence of the same with respect to the GDP and the subsequent reversal of trend relating to the past two years, a clear sign of a sought-after capitalization of resources.
74


Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it In fact, when a new weapon system comes online, the need for the construction and/or adaptation of infrastructures, the start of training programs and specific exercises, as well as the maintenance of numbers and efficiency is connected and consequential. of the system itself, in addition to the numerous other activities that indirectly contribute to general support or which in any case constitute costs that are passed on to the individual company.
It should be underlined, however, that the costs are affected, to a considerable extent, by any changes that have occurred both in the architecture of the FA and in the structure of the individual component, and in relation to the tasks and functions developed by them. Furthermore, a further element of impact on their variability is represented by "military inflation" - very different from the more well-known national inflation - which must be resorted to in consideration of the particular characteristics of military spending which, due to its atypical nature, is difficult to lends itself to the use of classic indicators at national level (Gross Domestic Product, public administration indices, etc.). ____________ In this context it is considered significant to highlight that the resources that the Defense allocates to the exercise of the military instrument should not be considered pure "management expenses" but, in a much stricter sense, real tools of functionality and efficiency. And all this in particular in the current delicate phase of transition towards the professional model where the quality of the men's training is accompanied by the availability of an old fleet of materials, vehicles and structures, requiring continuous and increasingly costly maintenance and repairs.
The costs of the various military components of each FA (for example the brigade, the ship, the wing) arise from statistical calculations based on information acquired through automated detection systems which have, depending on the component in question, as the object of investigation: - its effective strength; - training activities (exercises and courses) and operations conducted on national territory in the year under review; - the infrastructures used and the consumption connected to their use; - the supplies of vehicles and materials and related consumption.
By way of example, the following are indicated in: - Table 7, the expenses necessary for the functioning, or for the maintenance and carrying out of institutional training and operational activities, of some typical components of the three Armed Forces; -
Table 8, the acquisition costs of some significant vehicles and units; -
Table 9, the costs per hour of flight of Air Force aircraft from which it can be seen that an hour of flight of a TORNADO, excluding depreciation charges, costs over 18,000 _ (approximately 35 million); -
Table 10, the daily costs for the use of naval units and vehicles; - Table 11, costs per flight hour of Navy aircraft.
TABLE 6
3.4 Costs The FF.AA. they constitute a tool of very high technological content and, consequently, of high cost due to the inherent need to maintain the competitive advantage at the highest levels.
These systems constitute a very valid tool both for carrying out the necessary checks in terms of cost/effectiveness
- in the financial planning/programming phase, as in the organisational-executive phase of the annual budget - and for estimating: - any costs to be incurred for the “ex-novo” creation of a different type of component (plant costs); - the possible savings obtainable in the event of dissolution or change in the type of a component; - the levels of efficiency and effectiveness of the component, through comparisons between the standard reference costs and those actually incurred.
This has an initial impact, obviously, on the resources that must be constantly and adequately allocated to Investment and Development. But immediately after the realization of each of the planned projects, the FF.AA. they must absorb operating costs which, precisely because of the high technological content, are also generally very considerable.
Standard costs represent the "optimal" costs that each structure should approach to guarantee the maximum cost/ effectiveness ratio. They are processed taking into account the financial data relating to seven types or macro-aggregates: fixed costs (also including salaries, wages and expenses for food, clothing and hygiene), infrastructure, training, healthcare, efficiency maintenance, number maintenance and residual .
75


TABLE 10 The effects of this constant effort have materialized in the past two years with encouraging growth data for both operating and investment expenses, which recorded an increase in 2001 compared to the previous year, of 3% and 8% respectively. %.
These data, however, must not make us forget that Italy is the country, among the European countries that is most homogeneous in size and which has GDP values of the same order of magnitude as the national one, which sustains the lowest defense spending in an absolute sense, for the per capita one, as well as for its impact on the respective GDPs.
TABLE 9 A For its part, Defense has overcome a historic obstacle in budget formation with the creation of the Single Summit of the Armed Forces and has increased the effectiveness of spending with the restructuring of central and peripheral bodies and with a significant downsizing of operational units.
TABLE 9
TABLE 8
3.5 Conclusions/Considerations The consolidation of the state budget and public finances is destined to profoundly change the way the economy functions, generating new resources for investments in favor of the community.
TABLE 7
TABLE 11 It is in this obligatory scenario of integration with the corresponding instruments of the European partners that Defense must develop and propose new financial hypotheses, keeping in mind the multiple gaps that make consequent political action difficult to avoid.
Parliament, through the approval of recent appropriations, has demonstrated that a new consensus is forming on the need for a measured, effective increase in spending that responds to Italy's real strategic needs. It is therefore to be expected that, after the current contingent situation, characterized by a process of remediation of the financial shortcomings of previous years, starting from 2003 the resources allocated to Defense should be more significant. ____________ TYPE “B”: Benefits in favor of Organisations/Entities belonging to the State Administration, but not to Defence, obtained from the sum of the costs of maintenance and spare parts, management, personnel and out-of-pocket expenses.
TYPE “C”: Services in favor of organizations/bodies of the Ministry of Defense where the costs of maintenance and spare parts and out-of-pocket expenses are considered. we find that in 2001, compared to Italy's 218 _ (approximately 422 thousand lire), the French invested 423 _ (820 thousand) and the British dedicated 642 _ (1 million 245 thousand).
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it TYPE “A”: Services in favor of organizations/entities not part of the State Administration, obtained from the sum of the costs of maintenance and spare parts, depreciation of capital, management, personnel and out-of-pocket expenses. (graph Table 13), while, comparing the per capita spending for the Defense Function (graph Table 14),
NOTE In fact, for the Defense Function Italy spends a sum equal to approximately 47% of that incurred by France and 32% of that of England, as can be seen from the graph in Table 12. Similarly, with reference to the impact on GDP, Italian spending is just over half of that of France and 40% of that of England 76


To this end, an extraordinary legislative measure is being prepared which should financially support, through a spending forecast of 7.5 million euros (approximately 14,500 billion), to be implemented over a period of ten years, those priority programs which can be perfected in a relatively short time and at pre-established costs.
TABLE 13 FOLLOWS The decision of European countries to accelerate the process of developing their autonomous military intervention capacity and the commitment to set up a European Rapid Intervention Force by 2003 constitute, together with the recent parliamentary recognition of the "professionalisation" of the military instrument, the cardinal factors on which to base every financial estimate.
TABLE 14
TABLE 12
TABLE 14 FOLLOWS For this purpose, it seems reasonable to hypothesize a progressive rise in the medium term of the Defense Budget/GDP ratio from the current 1.5% to around 2% which, if the positive trend of the country's economy is confirmed, would allow the prospective availability of resources adequate and programmatic certainties for a military instrument capable of operating with an adequate level of efficiency and effectiveness and of comparing itself, with a view to complete interoperability, with that of other allied nations.
TABLE 12 FOLLOWS Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The priority allocation of resources should in this case be directed both towards the growing operating costs related to an increasingly sophisticated tool, qualitatively and technologically, which requires training cycles different from the current ones, and towards the indispensable modemization and adaptation programs in capable of bridging the technological gap, within the times required by the intemational commitments undertaken, reversing the historical trend towards undercapitalisation. In a second stage, the operational components will be renewed, favoring the modemization of the operational lines and older vehicles.
In the latter context, the use of special laws, through which to finance one or more main programs - an instrument which in the past has allowed the Armed Forces to undertake some large programs allowing for the modemization of the military instrument - appears to be the most appropriate solution to guarantee in the short-medium term the financial certainties necessary to start a renewal process that is consistent with the timing dictated by the pressing and no longer postponable needs.
TABLE 13 ____________ 77


4.5.2 OCCAR (Joint Organization for Armaments Collaboration)
4.9.1 Joint component 4.9.1.1 C4I function 4.9.1.2 Target recognition, surveillance and acquisition function 4.9.1.3 Intelligence function 4.9.1.4 Mobility functions 4.9.1.5 Defense/reaction functions 4.9.1.6 Force protection functions 4.9.2 Land component 4.9 .2.1 C4I function 4.9.2.2 Defense/reaction function
4.9.3 Maritime component
4.9.3.1 C4I function
4.9.3.2 Defence/reaction function
4.9.3.3 Force protection function 4.9.4 Air component 4.9.4.1 C4I function 4.9.4.2 Defence/reaction function 4.9.4.3 Mobility function 4.9.4.4 Function sustainability/logistics/training
4.5 INTERNATIONAL CO-PRODUCTION IN THE NATIONAL
INDUSTRIAL PANORAMA 4.5.1 Weag (European Armaments Group)
4.9 Research, development AND ACQUISITION
4.4 NATIONAL INDUSTRIAL SYSTEM
4.3.1 Organizational structure 4.3.1.1 Before the reform
4.3.1.2 The reform 4.3.1.3 After the reform 4.3.2 Defense Industry Agency
4.8 Marketing of weapons
PART IV
THE INDUSTRIAL SYSTEM 4.1
TASKS - ORGANIZATION 4.2 THE
GENERAL DIRECTORATES 4.3
THE DEFENSE INDUSTRIAL SECTOR
4.7.1 Development and implementation of programs 4.7.2 Private negotiation 4.7.3 Advisory committee 4.7.4 Peculiarities relating to the armaments market 4.7.5 Computerization of contractual and "e-procurement" procedures
4.9.5.3 Test Facilities
4.9.5.4 Research funds
4.9.5.5 “Dual use” technologies
4.10 CONCLUSIONS/CONSIDERATIONS ____________
4.6 National Industrial Landscape
4.7 Procurement policy
4.9.5.2 ETAP program (European Technology Acquisition Programme) Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
4.5.4 Considerations
4.9.5.1 NATO RTO (Research & Technology Organisation)
4.5.3 LOI (Letter of Intent)
4.9.5 Technological research 78


4.2.1 the General Directorate of Land Armaments (TERRARM), the General Directorate of Naval Armaments (NAVARM) and the General Directorate of Aeronautical Armaments (ARMAEREO) responsible for the study, research and technical development, construction, procurement,
4.1 Tasks-Organization The organization of Defense as regards the industrial apparatus, is headed by the administrative area at the top of which is the Secretary General/DNA on whom the 10 General Directorates of the Ministry depend.
The Deputy General Secretary (civil) is a General Manager to whom the SG/DNA has delegated matters of an administrative nature which concem affairs of a general, personal, accident prevention, litigation, benefits, expense control, standardization of contractual procedures. In this capacity he deals with the General Directorates responsible for personnel, recruitment and services.
The aforementioned law on the reform of the Top Management provides that the position of Secretary General can be held by an officer of the Army, Navy or Air Force with the rank of lieutenant general, or corresponding, in permanent service or by a civilian of the Administration public, or extemal to it, in relation to specific professional experiences and qualifications.
In his role as DNA (National Director of Armaments), the Secretary General is responsible for directing the research, development and acquisition of weapons systems, based on the programs defined by the Chief of Defense Staff. In this context, it participates in high intemational fora in the framework of the implementation of multinational agreements.
The staff of the General Secretariat of Defense and National Armaments Directorate, having also absorbed some functions of the dissolved General Directorates and Central Offices and having to implement the reorganization resulting from law 25/97 and the related regulation referred to in Presidential Decree 556/2000 ( modified and integrated precisely as regards the General Secretariat by the recent Presidential Decree 172/2000), will amount to approximately 490 units, compared to the 629 pre-existing at the end of '97.
In the exercise of his duties, the General Secretary/DNA makes use of a "Staff" made up of The SG/DNA is a member of the Superior Council of the Armed Forces, of the Committee of Chiefs of Staff and is President of the Advisory Committee which examines the most important contracts in the field of armaments. He is also Vice President of the Defense - Industry Committee, chaired by the Minister of Defence.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it General Secretariat and National Armaments Directorate, within which two Deputy General Secretaries operate, one military and the other civilian, who at present, on the basis of the delegated powers, are responsible for two different areas of interest divided into 6 departments indicated in the graphic.
This staff will have to enable it to carry out both "intemal" and intemational functions, the latter of which is continually increasing and which in other countries are managed by structures made up of at least 800/1000 people.
4.2 The General Directorates The reform led to the merging of the functions previously carried out by the General Directorates, which went from 19 to 10. ____________ The Deputy Secretary General/Deputy National Director of Armaments (military) is an officer with the rank of Lieutenant General (or corresponding) who by delegation deals with activities relating to intemational cooperation, armaments policy, research and development, liaison and support for national industry, the acquisition of weapon systems, connections with technological research bodies, automation and information technology. Furthermore, he deals with the General Directorates responsible for the acquisition of weapons systems.
GENERAL DURATIONS
GENERAL SECRETARIAT / DNA
STRUCTURE OF THE T/A AREA 79 The General Directorates directly involved in the procurement of vehicles and materials for the FAs are:


INDUSTRIAL TECHNICAL AREA The aforementioned law of 28 December 1995, n. 549 established to "proceed with the restructuring of the Arsenals, Plants and Technical Centres, rationalizing their related tasks through the optimization and concentration of production processes, also through mergers".
The aforementioned precept was implemented with the legislative decree of 28 November 1997, n. 459 which divided the Defense industrial area into two parts: the first included the entities to be placed under the control of the FA Inspectorates while the second included those dependent on the Secretary General.
4.3.1 Organizational structure
- Before the reform
4.3 The Defense Industry sector
4.2.2 the General Directorate of Telecommunications, Information Technology and Advanced Technologies (TELEDIFE) which carries out the aforementioned functions relating to the equipment common to the 3 Armed Forces and relating to Communications, Air Defense and Command and Control (C2), Data Automation and Telematics;
4.3.1.2 The reform transformation, disposal for all typical weapon systems, equipment and ammunition, respectively for the land, naval and aeronautical sectors and the related contractual and budgetary activities; • ____________ In particular: • with Presidential Decree 1481, the basic rules for the reorganization and modemization of military establishments and arsenals were defined, such as production and work bodies, placed under the General Directorates;
Presidential Decree no. 1007 of 5 June 1976 constituted the implementing regulation for the functioning of industrial military establishments and arsenals. It identified the categories of establishments classified as: large, medium and small potential. Furthermore, all the skills to which the aforementioned institutions had to respond were specified in detail; • with the Ministerial Decree of 23 December 1977, the number, name, category, dependence (on the competent technical General Management), materials under the responsibility of the Arsenals and Establishments were established, grouped in the number of: 3 of "Great potential"; 17 of "Medium potential"; 19 of "Small Potential".
The main regulations to which the pre-existing technical-industrial area of Defense referred are to be identified in the decree of the President of the Republic of 18 November 1965, n.1481, in the decree of the President of the Republic of 5 June 1976, n.1077 and in the Ministerial Decree of 23 December 1977.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The bodies of the technical-industrial area of Defense (35 Establishments and Arsenals) before the reform (law 28
December 1995, n. 549) constituted a legacy that Defense had carried with it since the time of the First World War.
At the time they represented production entities which, over the years, essentially became maintenance entities. Of these, 24 were from the Army, 9 from the Navy while 3 had a distinctly joint force character; the Air Force has never had factories or arsenals as it has always used the companies and civil companies producing the carriers for production, as well as for 4th level maintenance.
Substantially the differences existing between the bodies placed under the FA Inspectorates and those under the Secretary General consisted in the fact that the former were bodies considered functional
OF DEFENSE BEFORE REFORM With a subsequent Ministerial Decree dated 20 January 1998, the bodies dependent on the Army Logistics Inspectorate, the Naval Support Inspectorate of the Navy and the Secretary General were identified.
INDUSTRIAL TECHNICAL AREA 80


The plants in tables "A" and "B" have moved into the technical operational area in application of the specific rule of the law on the reform of top management (law 18 February 1997, n. 25), which attributes the direct responsibility of the Chiefs of Staff of the Armed Forces to maintain the efficiency of the military instrument entrusted to them.
• possible transformation into joint-stock companies of the reconverted and economically convenient entities, which are destined to become an industrial area not of the Armed Forces, with the task of operating both in favor of the CEO and in extemal sectors.
From this perspective, with the aim of ensuring unitary private management for the latter entities, the Defense Industries Agency was established (article 22 of the legislative decree 30.7.1999, n° 300), which must operate in compliance with the objective of economic management and the principles that regulate competition and the market.
From this process, sanctioned by the legislative decree of 28 November 1997, n. 459, the subdivision of the military establishments is derived in tables "A" (5 maintenance centers for the Army), "B" (3 arsenals and 1 joint missile maintenance center for the Navy), "C " (19 Army bodies and 4 Navy bodies), "D" (including the technical centers and aircraft maintenance departments of the operational technical area), referred to in Ministerial Decree 20.1.1998, implementing the aforementioned legislative decree .
In this context, the industrial area (which concems only the Army and the Navy) has been subjected to a profound reform, aimed above all at framing the actual needs of technical logistical support of the Armed Forces through the identification of a limited and efficient number of Maintenance Hubs, also responding to operational and strategic requirements, while the remaining factories/arsenals have passed through the area of the Secretary General for the analysis of their production capacity, in order to identify other possible production sectors, foreseeing their decommissioning in case of a negative outcome of the aforementioned analysis.
• restructuring, which allows the new mission to be carried out effectively and economically convenient management;
• control of economic management for two consecutive years; • provision for the closure of entities for which it is not possible to identify a new mission within two years of the entry into force of the legislative decree, or those which have not achieved economically convenient management for two consecutive financial years;
4.3.1.3 After the reform The restructuring of the Defense was based on the criteria of reduction, rationalization and optimization of production procedures, the regulation of the contracted mobility of civilian employees, the disposal of structures and properties no longer usable; all with the aim of adapting the organization to the needs of the modem military instrument and the available resources. a safe outlet both in the defense sector and on the market; to the use of the military instrument, while the latter belonged to a category destined for closure if, within two years, it was not possible to entrust them with the carrying out of any activity or that, for two consecutive years after the assignment of the activities and the adoption of the measures envisaged by the restructuring plan, had not achieved the ability to operate according to economic management criteria.
• assignment of a new mission, in whole or in part even the same as the one carried out, which can guarantee ____________ UGGEATI, which took charge of the aforementioned bodies starting from 1.11.1999, carried out, also making use of the advice of an expert from the national industry chosen by the Minister, the preliminary survey of the area, aimed at acquiring a exhaustive picture of the activities of the plants and the potential possibilities of their industrial reconversion.
Furthermore, it ensured the ongoing management of the entities in question, having taken over all the skills previously exercised by the technical general directorates. The aforementioned investigation made it possible to identify the factories with concrete possibilities for rationalization and/or reconversion according to economically convenient management criteria, to be implemented according to the procedure dictated by Legislative Decree 459/97, which provides for the
following steps for each factory:
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The General Secretary carries out the superordinate functions of the establishments/arsenals of table "C" through the General Office for the Management of Industrial Technical Area Institutions (UGGEATI), which the Minister of Defence, in accordance with the provisions of Legislative Decree 459/97, established by decree dated 25.1.1999.
Therefore, the entities in question were placed under the control of the respective FA Logistics Inspectorates and subjected to a restructuring process, still in progress, with the consequent adjustment of the staff, with the aim of obtaining maximum production efficiency.
The above actions have affected the structure of table "C" in the following way:
81


o Military Motorization Establishment of Bologna, whose competences have converged in the North and South heavy maintenance poles (Piacenza and Nola), as well as in the maintenance pole of telecommunications, electronic and optoelectronic means of Rome. The related closure decrees are being formalized. o NBC plant in Civitavecchia, whose transfer to table "A" was sanctioned by the Ministerial Decree dated 8
February 2001; o NBC Technical Center of Civitavecchia, which is included in the same Decree regarding the NBC Plant, with which it will be merged into a single body by the SME, also on the basis of a restructuring/rationalization study developed by UGGEATI. transfer to the Defense Industries Agency with o Military Electronic and Precision Materials Establishment in Rome with related Section Detached; o Naval Munition Establishment of Taranto, which passed through the operational area of the MM, Multifunctional experimentation center in Montelibretti; in accordance with Ministerial Decree dated 25 May 2000;
Undersecretary for the Coordination of Civil Protection, to the establishment of two multipurpose logistical support centres, respectively in the North and South of the country. This interest, formalized in advance with a letter of intent signed by the Undersecretaries of the two Departments on 20 July 1999, subsequently developed with a laborious negotiation coordinated by the Presidency of the Council, which reached a successful conclusion with the formalization of the decree indicated above.
Following the recent suppression of the Civil Protection Agency and the simultaneous transfer of the aforementioned Department to its dependence
• closure of the entities already indicated in the "Memorandum of Understanding on aspects of restructuring", signed on
20.5.1998 by the Minister pro tempore and the trade unions, as establishments no longer meeting the needs of the CEO, as the conditions for a possible assignment of altemative missions to those carried out so far (as they are included in those entrusted to the plants in tables "A" and "B"): o Rome Transmission Technical Centre; o Rome Engineering Technical Centre; o Technical Center of the Commissariat of Rome, whose skills have merged into the Centre
• relegation to the respective Armed Forces for operational and strategic reasons: • This transfer of competences arose from a specific interest, expressed in 1999 by the then detachments in Civitavecchia, La Spezia and Gardone Val Trompia; ____________ o Turin Motor Vehicle and Spare Parts Supply Center and Ciriè Armament Experience Range Detached Section, which merged into the Turin Engineers' Wheeled, Tracked and Materials UTT, with detachments in Pavia, La Spezia and Bolzano. transfer within the Department of Civil Protection (Interministerial Decree dated
9 May 2001): o Military Engineers Establishment of Pavia; o Capua Military Fireworks Plant.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it ol the Military Testing and Experience Establishment for the Armament of Nettuno and the related detached section of S. Severa; o Technical Center for Weapons and Ammunition of Nettuno, which merged into the UTT of Nettuno, with o Military Restoration and Recovery Establishment of Noceto di Parma; o Baiano di Spoleto Military Land Ammunition Plant; o Fontana Liri Military Propellants Plant; o Spolette Military Establishment in Torre Annunziata; o Military Chemical Pharmaceutical Plant of Florence; o Cord production plant in Castellammare di Stabia.
• transformation into Technical Offices with ministerial decree of 14 July 1998. This need arose from the restructuring of the General Directorates which, as a consequence of the loss of the factories/arsenals which passed through the operational technical area, highlighted the need to have peripheral structures dedicated to the contractual execution pertaining to them. The entities involved, which have come under the DG Land Armaments, are: •
Ministerial Decree dated 24 April 2001:
82


4.3.2 Defense Industries Agency Military Graphic Establishment of Gaeta;
The purpose of the Agency is to manage the activities of the production and industrial units which have been or will be transferred to it by the Minister among those hitherto placed under the authority of the Secretary General on the basis of the Ministerial Decree of 20 January 1998, in implementation of the Legislative Decree of 28 November 1997 , n. 459 on the reorganization of the Industrial Technical Area of the Ministry of Defence. or • To achieve its institutional goals, it will be able to stipulate conventions and agreements with public and private entities for the supply or acquisition of goods or services, participate in consortia, including intemational ones, and in companies on the basis of authorization from the Minister of Defence.
Among the most important innovations introduced by the founding decree is the provision of an agreement that regulates relations between the agency itself and the supervising Minister.
Maritime Military Arsenal of La Maddalena, whose analysis, in consideration of the strong social impact of its reconversion, was entrusted by the Minister pro tempore to the coordination of the Presidency of the Council, also following the further worsening of the environmental situation linked to the transfer of the Autonomous Maritime Military Command in the Cagliari headquarters;
In conclusion, the activity carried out so far has been aimed, with the approval of the Political Authority, at the recovery of all the entities in table "C", for which the existence of effective reconversion prospects has been ascertained according to the criteria dictated by the legislation responsible for the restructuring of the industrial area. In fact, these bodies have been relocated according to their production capacity, or dedicated to tasks deriving from specific needs arising both inside and outside the dicastery, or directed towards re-employment hypotheses, which will be verified and implemented by the Agency.
The agency has the power to proceed with the transformation of production units into joint-stock companies, exercising shareholder rights on behalf of the Ministry of the Treasury. of the Presidency of the Council of Ministers, the procedures for formalizing the project in the new configuration have been started. in-depth analysis of the entities for which it has not yet been possible to identify a new mission, with consequent extension of the two-year deadline to 31 December 2004 (Interministerial Defense - Treasury Decree of 5 May 2000):
The situation achieved so far has led us to believe that the aforementioned bodies can also find a useful place in the Agency.
The entities in question have the final objective of achieving, within a given period, the ability to operate according to economic management criteria through the rationalization of activities, the numerical and qualitative definition of personnel, a new organizational structure and an opening to the market. commercial.
The choice made by the Council of Ministers to place a person with proven entrepreneurial experience at the helm of the Agency clearly shows the desire to enhance the entities in question. There could even be areas which, with appropriate redevelopment and adequate entrepreneurial ability, could become niches of excellence. ____________ or the scope of the new mission already identified.
These are entities that carry out production activities of goods and services in different fields both for public administrations and, especially in the future, for private entities.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it or Ultimately, the decree representing the founding act proposed to entrust the management of the activities of the transferred factories to a new organizational structure.
Maritime Military Arsenal of Messina, for which a review is underway The Agency must ensure unitary and coordinated management and proceed with the review and modification of production cycles and the identification of aggregations of production units. The Minister of Defense himself is the supervisory body.
In fact, three-year agreements will be stipulated between the supervising Minister and the Agency, through its Director General, for the definition of the specific objectives and the verification, by the Minister, of the expected results.
The General Director is then responsible for the organization and management of the Agency and its staff. The General Director himself is responsible for the achievement of the established objectives, as well as for the quality of the production processes and administrative procedures and adopts the acts and measures necessary for the functioning of the Agency.
INDUSTRIAL TECHNICAL AREA 83


• In particular, actions are being defined and implemented, as preparatory to the industrial plans, which concem: • the rationalization and valorisation of activities; • the identification of new methods of evaluating and managing products; • the start of marketing; • the preparation of a new organization and a new management model; • the implementation of personnel policies suitable for industrial management, also through any changes aimed at overcoming the constraints, inherent in the regulation, for personnel management and the objectives of industrial management;
• the determination of employment levels and valorisation, also through a reconversion of • After a definition of the current situation, the first phase of rationalization and definition of the mission and objectives for the individual units began, which envisage short-term operational interventions, medium-term tactical and medium-long-term strategic interventions. •
• development and production of new product lines such as, for example: post-2000 hand grenade in Baiano (employment of 35 people); or cartridges with Capua plant to be transferred immediately to Fontana Liri (use 60 people);
The following activities are currently part of the Agency: Set-up and demilitarization plants: SM Spolette of Torre Annunziata; SM Land Ammunition of Baiano di Spoleto; SM Recovery and Restoration of Ammunition in Noceto di Parma where necessary • The improvement in the value of production occurs through: • an increase in volumes, a necessary objective resulting from the increase in production capacity, guaranteed by the existing order portfolio and that to be acquired on the military and civil market;
The Agency is based in Rome, has a legal personality under public law with activities subject to civil law regulations; and is endowed with administrative, organisational, financial and accounting autonomy and has the assets of the various units necessary for the management of the activities. • In particular, the pursuit of economic management occurs through a reduction in costs and an increase in revenues.
The reduction in costs will be determined by the rationalization of activities, the increase in efficiency and the transfer of costs, currently related to production or plant support, to production activities through the reconversion and optimization of personnel. The objective of the reconversion is to bring at least 50% of the staff to directly productive activities and the remaining 50% to production support activities and plant services. This will allow a percentage increase in production costs compared to support and factory costs, at the same time as a reduction in overall costs linked to the increase in efficiency and the redefinition of the overall personnel employed. • The total number of employees in these factories is currently around 1500 people and the industrial result for 2000 is highly negative, as the costs (around 100 billion) are far higher than the value of the production developed. ____________ In the specific field of products, for ammunition factories, the start of new production lines for military armaments and the expansion of the activities of propellants, cordage and chemical-pharmaceutical products to the competitive commercial market are envisaged.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it particularly highlight the logistics activity on Fontana Liri's Hawk SM missiles, propellants and explosives;
S. Rope production of Castellammare di Stabia;
Pharmaceutical Chemical Institute of Florence.
• the introduction of private criteria in industrial relations; • the identification of sources of financing for the reconversion and development of products. • some of the staff;
• ability to penetrate the "institutional" market (Financial Guard, Coast Guard, etc.) for the Castellammare plant and in the civil market for Castellammare (merchant market and various applications) and for Florence (production of healthcare cosmetics and medicines for third parties ); interest of the Defense Administration towards the Agency's current products and new ones that can be developed. • 84


Other similar interventions concem Law 24 December 1985, n. 808 "Interventions for the development and increase of the competitiveness of industries operating in the aeronautical sector", Law 22 November 1994, n. 644 "Urgent interventions to support the economy" and Law 8 August 1996, n. 421 "Urgent provisions for production activities" for the technological development of the aeronautical sector, Law 7 August 1997, n.
4.4 National industrial apparatus The defense industry represents one of the primary instruments through which each nation expresses its needs for security, sovereignty and technological and industrial independence.
266 "Urgent interventions in favor of the economy" - which guarantees the national presence in aeronautical programs connected to air defense needs and implemented in the EU context - and Law 11 May 1999, n.
ACTUAL STAFF OF THE T/A, T/I, UC AREA Finally, it should be underlined that it is the intention of the Minister of Defense to transfer the Gaeta printing plant and the La Maddalena and Messina arsenals to the management of the Agency by merging the latter two into a single operational unit.
In 2002 we will operate on the basis of the provisional financial year and, during the same year, the industrial plans, the annual activity plans for 2003 and the three-yearly activity plans for 2003-2005 will be defined with the relative budget estimates and the three-year agreement between the Minister and Agency.
A typical intervention tool is represented by Law 19 July 1993, n. 237 "Urgent interventions in favor of the economy" which assigns financing aimed at encouraging the rationalisation, restructuring and reconversion of companies operating in the sector of the production of military materials.
The simulation currently underway using the available data makes it possible to verify a stabilization of costs, at the regime value, in 2002 and an increasing value of revenues, which will make it possible to constantly reduce losses, until economic equilibrium is reached for all six the factories between 2004 and 2005.
The Public Administration, and therefore also the Defence, encourages and supports this rationalization process to contribute to the protection of those sectors of excellence owned by the national industry, eliminating overlaps and duplications for the benefit of cost containment and clarity of the relationship with users and, ultimately, increased competitiveness in the market. ____________ To maintain these values, in recent years, following the changed global geo-strategic balance, Italy has carried out a profound restructuring, rationalization and concentration of resources in areas of excellence, thus allowing the country to support an equal role with that of other European companies.
Currently, the Italian defense industry includes private companies such as FIAT (vehicles, space, propulsion and electronics), MARCONI (electronics and communications), ELETTRONICA (electronic warfare), MACCHI (trainer aircraft), BERETTA (small and medium weapons caliber), INTERMARINE (naval construction) and state-owned companies such as FINMECCANICA (aerospace, helicopters, defense electronics, energy and transport) and FINCANTIERI (shipbuilding). It has a total of 30,000 employees, records a tumover of 4,500 million euros with 35% exports and ensures approximately 80% of national defense needs. These companies have already concluded the financial reorganization and industrial relaunch plan, concentrating intemally all the major skills of the sector (industrial centers specialized in particular product lines) and rationalizing and optimizing the company structures.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The defense industry constitutes one of the three pillars on which security policy is based, together with foreign policy and military policy; positively affects the trade balance of states; contributes to the creation and development of a high-level industrial, technological and employment fabric.
Having concluded the intemal industrial reorganization process, the national industry continues to take an active part in the European one, which is constantly evolving and is leading to the creation of mergers and The defensive and security potential of a nation, in fact, is measured on the basis of the operational capacity of its Armed Forces but also depends, to a considerable extent, on the credibility and degree of autonomy and self-sufficiency of the corresponding industry.
140 "Regulations regarding productive activities", which promotes the development of the national high-tech industry.
DEFENSE INDUSTRY 85


This is an action carried out by the "Interministerial Committee for research, development and production activities involving defence", established in 1984 with an Interministerial Decree. Within this Committee, chaired by the Minister of Defence, representatives of the Public Administration meet (DEFENSE - ECONOMY and FINANCE - MAE - MAP
- UCPMA - EDUCATION, UNIVERSITY and RESEARCH), with those of industry represented by the Associazione Industrie per Aerospace, Systems and Defense (AIAD) which brings together around 80 advanced technology industries with around 50,000 employees.
4.5.1 WEAG (Westem European Armaments Group) This is an optimization process which involves, alongside the industries, various departments and sectors of the Public Administration in an action to coordinate the activities to direct them towards common objectives.
These alliances have also been supported by extensive govemment collaboration and, in particular, Defense has defined cooperation agreements aimed at creating those synergies essential for strengthening the defense industrial sector.
The initiatives aimed at creating a European armaments market are mainly the WEAG (Westem European Armament Group), the OCCAR (Organisme Conjoint de Cooperation en matière d'Armament) and the LoI (Letter of Intent).
Italy is fully included in this process following the agreements signed in April 2001 between Finmeccanica, EADS and Bae Systems in the missile sector and those in June 2000 between Finmeccanica and EADS in the aeronautical field, preceded by the agreements already operational between Alenia and Marconi Systems, in defense electronics, and between Agusta and GKN in the helicopter sector.
On this basis, for some time now we have been trying to promote the creation of a real European defense industry, attenuating protectionist barriers within EU countries and encouraging sectoral mergers of industries, in order to concentrate the various national capabilities in poles of great production quality. mergers aimed at establishing transnational production hubs for each production sector, of such consistency and technological level as to ensure their presence on the world armaments market.
In the European multilateral context, the desire of the European Union (EU) to create a European Security and Defense Identity has required collaboration to create a technological and industrial base aimed at allowing the creation of an integrated and interdependent industrial system at a European level, without which the greater operational autonomy sought would lose concreteness and become unrealistic. ____________
4.5 Intemational co-production in the intemational industrial panorama The Italian Defense is engaged in numerous intemational cooperation activities, both multilateral and bilateral, with particular regard to Europe and North America.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it In practice, govemment support for the defense industry takes shape.
It aims to allow a more effective use of funds for the research, development and procurement of military materials, increase the standardization and interoperability of armaments between member countries and strengthen Europe's political-industrial weight in the of NATO.
Within the Committee, the guidelines of the industrial defense policy are defined, the various needs are compared with the real possibilities of the country, support for exports is promoted, contractual procedures are updated and activities for the participation of industries are coordinated. national to intemational competitions.
The WEAG was bom in 1993 from the transfer of the functions of the IEPG (Independent European Program Group) to the Westem European Union (WEU); It is made up of 19 member countries(1) and operates as an informal consultation group in the field of armaments cooperation at the level of Defense Ministers.
BILATERAL COOPERATION
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION 86


(1) Italy, France, Germany, Great Britain, Spain, Sweden, Finland, Austria, Greece, Belgium, the Netherlands, It therefore appears essential for Italy to pay particular attention to and follow the activities of the OCCAR, like the other member countries, which also involve the entire national defense industrial sector.
4.5.3 LoI (Letter of Intent) Panel II, of which Italy held the presidency until 12/31/2000, in The research organization that reports to Panel II of the WEAG constitutes, at the moment, the most efficient and consolidated instrument of intervention, at European level, in the sector of research of specific military interest.
The possession of legal personality, which gives the Organization its own negotiating capacity (stipulation of contracts, hiring of staff, conduct of negotiation activities in general), allows OCCAR to manage said programs completely autonomously, without having to resort to the application of the national procedures regarding acquisition policy.
The downsizing of the WEU and the absorption of its functions by the EU seem to mark the days of life of the Group, but the need to have a political forum in Europe, directed by the Defense Ministers, in which the possibility of discussing together and developing cooperative activities makes maintaining the Group's activity essential, at least for the short/medium term.
The OCCAR (FR, GE, IT, UK) was established with the aim of rationalizing the "demand" through a common policy on the procurement of armaments, in order to guarantee interoperability between the respective Armed Forces and achieve economies of scale in the sector. From this perspective, the Organization's task is to coordinate, control and implement the programs relating to armaments that are assigned to it by the Member States, thus improving the effectiveness of the management of cooperation projects, in terms of cost, time and performance.
The WEAG's decision-making activity takes place on a unanimous basis and consequently, taking into account the large number of participating countries and the many different national interests to be considered, it has not led to concrete results, except those - quite limited - in the Research sector and Technology.
4.5.2 OCCAR (Joint Organization for Armaments Collaboration) ____________ Italy currently participates in approximately 59 projects for a total financial commitment of the order of 90.6 billion/year, of which 72.8 billion has already been financed.
Some of the management rigidities inherent to the EUCLID MOU and the Eurofinder procedure, which bound the WEAG countries to complete mutual openness regarding participation in each program, have recently been overcome with the signing of the Europe MOU. This makes WEAG procedures extremely flexible and available for the technical-administrative management of any type of program that may materialize under any institutional framework involving European countries.
Even within the framework of the treaty recently signed between the six major European countries producing armaments, resulting from the signing of the LoI, the issues of technological research occupy a central position. To take this into account, the Group of Managers of the Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it similar to the NATO RT Board, it is the control body of the organization that promotes, selects and approves individual research projects. WEAG has a structure, the Research Cell, based in Brussels, specifically dedicated to the technical-administrative management of contracts which are mainly assigned to defense industries. WEAG research is essentially conducted in an industrial context, has an annual budget (which each country individually and in a differentiated manner prepares in its own budget) and provides for a financial participation of the industry of the order of 50%. The projects are identified according to a "Top down" procedure (EUCLID MOU) or "bottom up" through the Eurofinder procedure which provides for the free and spontaneous presentation of individual projects by industries and/or research bodies interested in conducting them (and co-financing them ).
The Agreement represents a fundamental step not only for the establishment of a European industrial base, but also for the first real actions for the birth of a common European arms market, for the harmonization of military requirements, for the definition of common rules on exports and for coordinated research and development activities.
Portugal, Luxembourg, Denmark, Poland, Hungary, Czech Republic, Turkey and Norway.
The same objective of seeking a common will to operate concretely is set by the LoI Framework Agreement (FR, GE, IT, SP, SW and UK), signed on 27 July 2000, aimed at rationalizing the "offer" of the industry European.
87


One of the reasons why there is a certain reluctance to take on a leading role in this sector lies in the constraints deriving from Article 296 of the Treaty of Amsterdam, through which EU Member States wanted to reserve decision-making power in the sector of armaments, effectively imposing a barrier to the work of the Commission and to the control of Parliament, even if some bodies of the European Commission carefully follow the actions to be carried out. other countries, and to coordinate defense planning more and more closely, already in the conception phase, so that it becomes increasingly homogeneous and coherent. It is less and less true, in fact, that Italy has its own requirement, different from the German or French one: in reality, the English, French, Italian and German defense planning - to name a few - are much more uniform than you might think. If you look at the end of the procedure, it is in fact possible to see that the capabilities pursued are 80 or 90% similar, even if at the moment each country still thinks and plans them on its own.
The fact of pushing more on a European "joint moment" of planning of the military instrument and of In fact, the mutual defense pact contained in Article V of the amended Brussels Treaty has not been incorporated into the community framework, just as the EU is slow to take significant decisions regarding the armaments sector.
The second element that needs to be taken into account is that military planning, just as it is no longer a "single service", is no longer a "single nation" either: this requires strengthening knowledge of how they move
4.5.4 Considerations However, despite the affirmation of these "enhanced cooperation" initiatives, i.e. those referring to a limited number of countries, broad and mature European solidarity is still lacking.
Concrete programs have not yet been defined but the aspirations described will lead to the substantiation of initiatives capable of directing the axis of military research activities in Europe and therefore promise to be of significant financial commitment.
By enhancing an overall vision of the military instrument, the programs and priorities to which available resources can be assigned, the most appropriate and effective choices can be made for the instrument as a whole. Investment planning designed for individual components, then added together and "adjusted" in some way, is no longer cost-effective or responsive to needs.
LoI research which is on its way to becoming an important reference for a unitary and coordinated management of research policy at least between these countries which, due to the importance of their respective production capacities, aspire to become a privileged forum for direction and decision-making in the European context.
As established by Law 25 of 18 February 1997 and by Presidential Decree 556 of 25 October 1999, the planning of the military instrument starts from the directives of the Minister of Defence, is elaborated by the Chief of Defense who proposes it to the Political Authority and ends with the approval of the Minister of Defense. ____________ To obtain maximum results in terms of quality and cost-effectiveness, it is also necessary to refine the way in which operational needs are planned today.
At the national level it is necessary to concentrate the process of evaluating operational requirements, and therefore programs, as much as possible in a fundamentally inter-force perspective.
The CNAD (Conference of National Armaments Directors) is part of the activities aimed at concretizing transatlantic collaboration, which is one of the Main Committees of the Atlantic Council and is responsible for all problems conceming defense equipment. It plays a senior management role (Board of Directors) in relation to the employees of multinational working groups responsible for carrying out cooperation activities in the armaments sector.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it In the near future it will therefore be necessary to proceed with harmonization and, subsequently, integration into a single system of European assemblies which will ultimately flow into the institutional structures of the European Union.
However, the Atlantic Alliance remains a pillar of Italian and European security.
Reference is made to the initiative launched in 1997 by the Commission relating to the "Implementation of a European Union Strategy in the sector of defense-related industries", through an "Action Plan", divided into 14 points. A plan which, however, has not yet had concrete development. definition of operational requirements - in full coherence and transparency with the Alliance's "Defence Planning" - involving at least those countries that have greater homogeneity and a more active role in the vision of a European defense policy, can help, among other things, to increase cooperation opportunities and, therefore, create that critical mass on programs which in tum will allow real savings in terms of cost-effectiveness, both in development and in acquisition, and above all in the management of the life cycle of materials .
88


Some difficulties encountered by the CNAD in responding to the needs of member countries, towards the mid-1980s, led the National Armaments Directors of France, Germany, Great Britain and the United States of America to establish the so-called "Four Power NADs ", which became "Five Power NADs" in April 2000, with the entry of Italy. This is an informal partnership intended to coordinate the positions of the major nations and to define common strategies regarding the major intemational cooperation programs.
The USA, in fact, facilitated by the unitary legislative context and by the advantage of operating in a single intemal market and with a single customer, have been able to express uniqueness and coherence in defense and foreign policy strategies, with the consequent possibility of operating in the world market with great competitiveness and effectiveness.
4.6. Intemational Industrial Landscape The changes that have occurred in the last decade in the intemational geostrategic scenario have been addressed by Westem countries not only on a political level but also on an industrial level.
They have therefore quickly achieved alliances and mergers between the large national industrial complexes, among which it is worth mentioning Lockheed Martin, Northrop Grumman for the aerospace, missile and defense electronics sector, Boeing for aerospace and Raytheon for missile sector.
The most evident manifestation of this desire dates back to the beginning of 1998 with the launch of a study aimed at the creation of a European Aerospace and Defense Company (EADC), through the integration of the At a bilateral level, the Italian Defense has so far signed 48 Agreements (14 already ratified) and 12 are under negotiation.
Among these, those relating to the countries of Eastem Europe (in particular Russia), North Africa (Egypt and Algeria), the Far East (India, China, South Korea, Singapore and Malaysia) and the South are of great interest. America (Chile). The ratification and operationalization of these Agreements will, in short, prevent the long times usually required for the approval process from being perceived abroad as indifference to the problems of cooperation.
Even the major industrialized countries of Europe, albeit with a certain difficulty, have subsequently implemented specific rationalizations on a national basis and have also attempted to establish alliances and mergers between their companies in the defense sector. ____________ The US defense industry was the first to react to this new and unexpected reference framework. (Fig. 1) In the context of intemational relations for cooperation in the armaments sector, bilateral govemment agreements, which are based on specific MoUs, assume particular importance. The formalization of these agreements responds to strategic needs and, at the same time, offers industries better possibilities for intervention in the areas of interest. The forms of collaboration generally envisaged in this type of agreement range from the purchase/sale of products and/or production licenses, to joint study, development and production.
In this context, the participating Nations have also established the "Intemational Cooperative Opportunities Group (ICOG)" which aims to strengthen transatlantic cooperation in the field of defense systems, with the aim of identifying cooperation opportunities and developing the more concrete ones.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it Faced with a market characterized by production redundancies, strong competitiveness and reduced demand, a review process was launched which led industries to carry out a courageous and demanding action of restructuring, rationalization and concentration of resources in areas of excellence, allowing them to guarantee an adequate presence and competitiveness in the armaments market.
ARTICULATION OF THE CNAD
FIGURE 1 89


The avionics, land and naval armaments and motoring sectors do not yet present particular concentrations of activity. concem the acquisition.
This last phase ends the preliminary process of the programme, which is mainly technical-operational in nature.
This process of industrial reorganization is constantly evolving and is leading, as mentioned, to the creation of mergers and amalgamations aimed at the creation of transnational production centers for each production sector, of such consistency and technological level as to ensure the presence on the armaments market, such as ASTRIUM (EADS, BAe Systems) in the space sector, Eurocopter (EADS) and Agusta Westland in the helicopter sector, MBDA (BAe Systems, Aerospatiale Matra and Alenia Difesa) in the missile field, Alenia Marconi Systems (BAe Systems and Alenia Difesa) in the defense electronics, while an agreement is being finalized between Finmeccanica and EADS for the establishment of an equal joint venture which will control the activities of Alenia, the German DASA and the Spanish CASA.
In parallel with this process, the path of intemational cooperation was pursued by creating numerous collaborations, through consortia, companies and joint ventures, relating to specific programs. requirements and related financial charges; • official attribution of the mandate to the competent DG; • general indication, by the DG, of the technical-financial-industrial parameters which In particular, national vertical integration operations have been carried out, such as the mergers between the French companies Aerospatiale and Matra Hautes Technologies and between the English companies BAe and GEC (Marconi Electronic System), transnational sectoral acquisition operations, as in the case of the German DASA towards the Spanish CASA, and merger operations of companies of different nationalities (Aerospatiale Matra with DASA/CASA) which gave rise to the European Aeronautic Defense and Space Company (EADS), the first European aerospace group. (Fig. 2) The technical-operational area is responsible for technical planning and programming, which takes shape with the definition of the objectives of strengthening and modemizing the instrument and essentially develops through the following fundamental phases: • identification of needs; • definition of the technical-operational characteristics of the means and materials and evaluation of the major European defense companies; the ambitious project proved difficult to implement and in its place, sectoral production hubs were established through transnational structural agreements.
4.7.1 Development and implementation of programs The procedures for the implementation of a purchasing policy, even if the evolutionary process of the problem is characterized by continuity and unity of development, are currently conducted separately within the technical-operational area and in the technical-administrative sphere. ____________
4.7 Procurement policy (articulated by FA) budget allocations.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it Defense is therefore involved in numerous intemational programs, both multilateral and bilateral, with particular regard to Europe and North America.
• law, if they require extraordinary financing; • decree of the Minister of Defense, when it comes to programs financed through the ordinary funds Now the European defense industry will have to continue along the path of concentration and rationalization in order to reduce the technological gap with the United States and increase its ability to penetrate the intemational arms market.
Pursuant to the law of 4 October 1988, n. 436 (rules for the simplification and control of the procedures envisaged for central defense supplies), the main programs conceming Defense (renewal and modemization of the weapon system, works, means and goods directly intended for defense national), are subject to approval with:
FIGURE 2 90


Once activated, the General Management identifies the purchasing methods by determining the scope of the contractor's search (national, Community, GATT, WEAG or between countries signatory to particular intemational agreements) and the type of procedure to be adopted (bidding, private negotiation, competitive tender, etc.).
4.7.3 Advisory Committee In order to streamline the procedural process relating to Defense contracts, the recent legislative decree of 28 December 1998, n. 496 established an "Advisory Committee", chaired by the Secretary General of Defense, with the task of expressing "opinions" on the draft contracts deriving from intemational cooperation agreements on armaments and on those implementing programs approved by law or decree of the Minister of Defense pursuant to the aforementioned law 436/88. The Committee's competence concems programs with amounts exceeding 5 million euros.
These opinions concem the technical, administrative and economic profiles as well as the adequacy and convenience of the estimated prices to be based on the tenders (restricted procedures), or agreed with the contracting companies (negotiated procedure).
Said supply orders consequently materialize in contractual relationships between the CEO and the private contractors according to the national and community procedures in force.
The technical-administrative area (competent General Directorates) is interested in the acquisition of supplies through procurement orders for goods and/or services by the General Staff.
Furthermore, in contracts stipulated by private negotiation, as a further form of control and adjustment of prices to a principle of congruity, the "safeguard clause" is inserted, by virtue of which the company must provide insurance that the price offered does not is higher than what it has practiced, in relation to similar services, towards its best customer, even at an intemational level, with the clarification that the violation of this clause will lead to the reduction of the contract conditions within the aforementioned limit.
The Minister of Defense reports annually to the competent Parliamentary Commissions on the aforementioned programs and on the contractual activity resulting from them.
For this purpose, the General Secretariat of Defense has prepared a specific "Methodology for determining company hourly costs for services or supplies" which indicates the "guidelines" as well as the procedures to be followed in order to avoid, as also noted by the same Court of Auditors, that the so-called "costs of inefficiency" of the industrial system fall on the Defense Administration.
In this case, and provided that the programs do not refer to the maintenance of equipment or the replenishment of stocks, the opinion of the competent Parliamentary Commissions must be obtained before issuing the ministerial decree.
This control is carried out by a Commission specifically appointed by the contracting body which, in order to express its assessments, makes use of the results of checks previously carried out by another Commission at the requested company, aimed at ascertaining the impact of all the company costs in running the business, in order to determine the hourly rate of labor which will constitute one of the elements for the formation of the price of the good to be acquired. ____________ While with the adoption of "restricted procedures" (private tender and competitive tender), the supply is based on the price previously identified by the Administration following the definition of specific "technical conditions" and the market situation, with the procedures "negotiate" arises the need to subject the price offered by the company chosen for the negotiation to a particular form of control called "technical-economic congruity analysis".
This is due to the frequency, particularly in the field of WARLIKE materials, of resorting to the purchase of goods whose production is guaranteed by industrial property rights, due to the nature of which it is not possible to promote the competition for public offers, which a single company can supply with the technical requirements and the required degree of perfection.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
4.7.2 Private negotiation Of particular importance, in the context of defense procurement, is "private negotiation" among the methods of choosing the contractor.
Subsequently, the draft contract, the technical specifications and other related documents are prepared which, where possible, in relation to the nature of the contractual document, conform to standardized models.
Pursuant to the legislative decree that established the Committee, called a consultative body - composed of the Deputy Chief of Defense Ministry, a General Director of the Ministry, a Magistrate of the Court of Auditors and two experts with specific expertise in the field of cost analysis and industrial accounting - has replaced, with a view to simplification and streamlining of procedures in the joint forces area, various consultative bodies including 91


____________ The aforementioned rule, however, does not yet find general application as the expected Prime Ministerial Decree has not yet been issued. Despite this regulatory deficiency, and even before the issuance of the aforementioned simplifying rule, since December 1998 the General Directorate of the Commissariat and General Services has included on a specific website not only all notices and tender notices relating to its activity, but also the related specifications and directives which regulate in a precise and timely manner the procedures and criteria with which the Administration itself is required to comply in its activity.
In current intemational commercial practice, it is customary to pay the supplier an advance on the supply price at the time of signing the contract. This practice is not compatible with the general accounting rules of the State according to which it is legitimate to pay the price exclusively after the supply has been carried out (art. 12 LCGS, art. 5, paragraph 1 Legislative Decree 28 March 1977, no. 79 converted, with amendments, by law 28 May 1997, no. 140).
Despite the presence of intrinsic difficulties in operating with the timing often required by operational needs, the negotiation activity of the Defense Administration is based on the principles established in Legislative Decree 3
February 1993, n. 29 as amended by Legislative Decree no. 80/98, of cost-effectiveness, effectiveness, efficiency, in one with the aim of ensuring maximum transparency in carrying out procedures. In this context, it should be highlighted that in the context of law 340/2000, which lays down rules on administrative simplification, in order to give practical implementation to the aforementioned need for transparency, it has been established that all public administrations are required to publish on one or more IT sites, identified with Prime Ministerial Decree, notices and tender notices. These forms of communication do not, however, replace the other advertising obligations provided for by Community legislation, including the obligations of publication in newspapers or periodicals.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it Given the complexity of the material being procured, the supply is normally carried out after a long period of time compared to the date of issue of the order and, consequently, the company finds itself financially exposed for the activities relating to the preparation of the project and the acquisition of raw materials as well as the remuneration of its workers.
As regards the specific aspect of "e-procurement", the aforementioned law also provides for the possibility of carrying out "economic tenders" through the use of IT systems. These telematic procedures, also to be regulated by specific regulations, will certainly make it possible to speed up the process of choosing the
4.7.5 Computerization of contractual and "e-procurement" procedures Particular attention was also paid to strengthening the Public Relations Office, which, through an intranet system connected to all intemal offices and Divisions, allows us to guarantee, in real time, the satisfaction of the information requested by the various users. These achievements certainly constitute the example from which the other General Directorates can draw inspiration when the Implementing Decree is issued for a generalized adoption of forms of advertising on specific websites in order to ensure maximum transparency of the negotiation activity carried out.
4.7.4 Peculiarities relating to the armaments market The armaments market is a highly specialized market where companies operate that adopt solutions with very high technological content. Therefore, the areas of provenance of the weapon systems and their components and spare parts are very limited. It is inevitable, therefore, for Italy too to rely on the foreign market for its supplies, in particular the US one.
FA, provided for by numerous pre-existing laws, the activation of which often caused considerable delays in the start of the contractual activity due to the recurring overlapping of the relevant competences.
In this regard, it is worth mentioning the directives relating to the "verification of the adequacy of abnormally low offers", the "contractual execution" and the "procedures for the testing of materials" of the commissionerate which, again for the purposes of widespread diffusion, are were also published in the Official Gazette of the Italian Republic.
In fact, national legislation does not take into account the financial reality of the intemational markets of the sector, limiting the possibility of negotiating and acquiring materials produced abroad.
In this context, and after having consulted the Council of State on the matter, a draft provision was proposed for inclusion in the finance law for 2002 which contemplates the possibility, in the cases described above, of granting advances of part of the contract price, subject to the provision of a suitable guarantee, also in derogation of the current provisions which prohibit it. ninety two


The procedures in force for the issuing of authorizations for the export of military equipment and the transfer of the related documentation are currently regulated by law 185/90 and related implementing regulation Prime Ministerial Decree of 25 September 1999, n. 448. The regulations and controls provided for by this law are among the most restrictive among those currently in force in other Westem countries.
4.9 Research, development and acquisition In the last 15 years, in particular, there has been a real proliferation of intemational cooperation programs for the creation of vehicles and materials and, at the same time, an increase in acquisition programs for systems interforce value. This trend has allowed significant reductions in the costs of individual acquisition and modemization programs with a consequent beneficial impact on the defense investment sector.
This was possible thanks to the increasingly marked intemationalization of both Italian and European defense industries; to the decisive impulse recently given to the European integration process in many fields, including the Defense sector, through legal and regulatory initiatives (OCCAR Agency, Letter of
4.8 Marketing of weapons The peculiarity of the Defense organization and the need to immediately satisfy operational needs that are sometimes not programmable in detail, in sectors that do not allow continuity of services, would recommend providing specific exemptions for the AD in relation to certain types of materials which, although commonly acquired, for the FF.AA. they could take on a strategic character (for example, fuel lubricants).
Other operational adjustments to the authorization procedures remain to be examined to allow the national industry to be able to present itself at its best in the process of European structural integration of the armaments industry and participate, on an equal basis, in co-production programmes.
The need to rationalize and optimize state spending on goods and services that are common to all administrations has led to the establishment of a specific company within the Ministry of Economy and Finance (CONSIP SpA) which, following of specific "economic tenders", proceeds with the stipulation of specific agreements for goods and services, which each administration has the obligation to adhere to in order to satisfy its own needs. This, in addition to the achievement of economies of scale, leads to a streamlining of acquisition procedures by individual administrations, with consequent advantages also in terms of lower use of human resources.
The opportunity of ratifying the Framework Agreement, signed by the Defense Ministers of Italy, France, England, Germany, Spain and Sweden in Famborough on 27 July 2000, was therefore taken to make some necessary adjustments. contractor while guaranteeing the necessary "level playing field" as well as the secrecy, where required, and the transparency of all tender procedures.
However, more than ten years after the entry into force of this Law, several points have emerged that require modifications, in order to streamline the procedures without eliminating controls. In particular, its inadequacy in managing the complex phenomenon of European industrial concentration has been noted, with the formation of new companies in the form of Transnational Defense Companies (STDs), which presupposes the possibility of rationalizing and specializing production units according to a logic of industrial efficiency, through the circulation of parts produced between different factories located in different countries. ____________ As regards DUAL-USE material, export is regulated by Legislative Decree 89/97 and takes into account regulation 1334/2000 of the European Community. The entire investigation is carried out by the Ministry of Productive Activities which grants the export authorization after presentation to another Consultative Committee composed of representatives of the MAE (President), Defense, the Interior, Productive Activities, the Treasury, the Healthcare, Education and Research and the Customs Agency.
Furthermore, the Defense General Staff, after having asked the Armed Forces General Staff and the General Secretariat of Defence/DNA for information on the material under examination, expresses a binding opinion for the security and military technical aspects.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it After an initial preliminary phase, conducted by the SMD or the MAE in relation to the type of negotiation, the request for authorization is normally brought to the attention of an Advisory Committee, made up of representatives of the MAE (President), the Defence, the Interior, Productive Activities, Environment and Customs Agency, which expresses a non-binding opinion. In the case of classified material, during the investigation phase the ANS-UCSi is asked for its opinion and possible authorization for the disclosure of classified information.
In summary, the bureaucratic process involves the request for authorization for commercial negotiations and, upon conclusion of a contract, a subsequent request for export.
93


The program will end in the short term and will need to evolve in line with national programmes.
NGIFF (New Generation Identification Friend or Foe) National program for the creation of an advanced identification system through the development of IFF (Transponder and Interrogator) equipment.
Intemational cooperation program (with the USA, Canada, France, Germany, the United Kingdom, Norway and the Netherlands) aimed at the interoperability of existing national communications and data exchange systems through the definition and implementation of a common network architecture capable of guaranteeing "secure" communications between all participating countries, through the implementation of available technologies, adapted to specific military needs.
The technology acquired with the SICRAL program constitutes the basis for possible national participation in the NATO SATCOM POST 2000 program.
4.9.1 Joint component 4.9.1.1 C4I INSC function (Interoperable Network for Secure Communication) The final phase of approval of the MoU and the finalization of the contract are currently underway.
The technology developed with SOSTAR-X finds a possible future application within the NATO AGS (Allied Ground Surveillance) program.
The following functions, or functional areas, derive from the type of operations to be carried out, which, in tum, are divided according to the different Defense components (Joint Forces, Land, Maritime and Air): C4I (Command, Control, Coordination, Communications and Information ); Reconnaissance, Surveillance and Target Acquisition; Intelligence; Mobility; Defense/Reaction; Protection of Forces Sustainability/Logistics/Training Below are the most significant programs in progress.
The satellite was successfully launched in February 2001 and is expected to begin full operation in late 2001.
Intemational cooperation program (with France, Germany, Holland and Spain) to create a technological demonstrator of a synthetic aperture radar sensor (SAR - Synthetic Aperture radar) and with moving target detection capability (MTI - Moving Target Indicator).
Intent - LoI, etc.); to the regulatory completion of the reorganization of the Defense top management which increased the inter-force integration of its components.
National program for the acquisition of satellite communications capacity through the creation of a military satellite telecommunications system consisting of 1 satellite, the relevant ground segment and user terminals.
The program is currently in the phase of defining and creating a demonstrator.
SOSTAR-X (Stand-Off Surveillance Target Acquisition Radar) SICRAL (Italian Satellite for Confidential Communications and Alarm) ____________ The program is currently in the Production phase.
Intemational cooperation program (with USA, Canada, France, Germany, United Kingdom and Norway) to achieve interoperability of existing national land surveillance systems.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it Intemational cooperation program (with France, Spain, Germany and USA) for the creation of an integrated system for the distribution of tactical identification and navigation information, with small terminals, for aerial, naval and land platforms.
4.9.1.2 CAESAR (Coalition Aerial Surveillance and Reconnaissance) target recognition, surveillance and acquisition function The program will end in 2003.
4.9.1.3 Intelligence function MIDS (Multi-Information Distribution System/Low Volume Terminal) The industrialization phase is currently underway.
ATD (Advanced Technology Demonstrator) National program to carry out a feasibility assessment and then create a broadband digital receiver demonstrator for an electronic surveillance system.
94


The second satellite, "HELIOS 1B", was launched on 3 December 1999 from the aforementioned ESA range. The end of the operational life of the System is scheduled for 2004. In order to give continuity to the aforementioned System, France has long since started activities for putting the successor system into orbit, called HELIOS II and consisting of 2 satellites capable of provide images in the "panchromatic" at very high resolution (less than one meter) and in the IR at medium resolution (greater than one meter). Following the signing of the Intergovemmental Agreement on cooperation in Earth observation, signed by the Heads of Govemment of ITALY and FRANCE on 01.29.2001, Italy will acquire the right of access to a percentage of HELIOS resources through a specific MoU II, in exchange for FRANCE's access to radar resources of the COSMO-SKYMED programme.
Intemational cooperation program (with the USA, the United Kingdom and others) to create a multi-role stealth aircraft that meets the needs of different Armed Forces (for Italy, the Navy and the Air Force), using design criteria capable of reducing development costs, production and support in general, making use of modular solutions with the integration of multiple advanced technologies.
The program is currently in the definition phase. The development phase has started and the expected date of entry into service is 2011.
The launch of the first "HELIOS 1A" specimen took place on 7 July 1995 from the European Space Agency (ESA) range in Kourou (French Guiana).
HELIOS The Helios programme, in which France, Spain and Italy participate, is an optical observation satellite system, whose operational life is five years for each satellite and approximately twenty years for the terrestrial segment.
JSF (Joint Strike Fighter) The program involves the joint development of a system based on the Italian Cosmo-Skymed (radar) and French Pleiades (optical) national programs for use by both the Defense and the ASI (Italian Space Agency).
The program is currently in the definition phase and the foreseeable period of entry into service could be after 2015.
France is also participating in this phase as an observer.
A definition and development study is underway to give the system a certain defense capability against ballistic missiles.
COSMO/SKYMED PLEIADES Intemational cooperation program (with France) for the acquisition of satellite remote sensing capacity through the creation of a dual system (military and commercial) consisting of a constellation made up of 4 radar satellites (SAR),
2 optical satellites and the related ground segment.
Intemational cooperation program (with Germany) to develop and produce an aircraft that will replace the ATLANTIC-1 to continue to carry out anti-submarine warfare and maritime patrol missions.
Intemational cooperation program (with France) for the development of a new family of missile systems.
The aim of the program is to build new generation land and naval systems, according to the operational needs of the Army and Navy, capable of countering the foreseeable air and missile threat until 2020-2030. ____________ The program is currently in the development phase.
4.9.1.5 MPA defense/reaction function (Maritime Patrol Aircraft)
4.9.1.6 Force protection function FSAF (Family of Future Surface-Air Systems) Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
4.9.1.4 Mobility function C27J National program for the creation of a medium/light transport aircraft.
National program for the acquisition of a UAV system (unmanned reconnaissance aircraft) to be used for defining the concepts of use of the system and for solving airworthiness and air traffic control issues through an operational training phase.
The industries involved in the program are the main ones in the aerospace sector.
UAV (Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Predator) 95


NH-90 (NATO Helicopter - 90)
4.9.2.1 C4I LLAPI/FAST (Low Level Air Picture Interface) function Intemational cooperation program (with France, Germany, Denmark, Canada, Holland, Spain, Turkey, USA and United Kingdom) aimed at multinational interoperability between C2 low-altitude aerial detection systems between the Armed Forces of different countries.
The program is currently in the RRE phase (Risk Reduction phase) and the expected date of entry into service is 2011-2013.
Intemational cooperation program (with Germany and USA) to develop an area defense missile system to protect vital targets (civil and military) and maneuver forces against the growing threat of tactical ballistic missiles and cruise missiles (Cruise missiles).
4.9.2 Terrestrial Component The aim of the program is to develop common specifications and standards aimed at the development of tactical-field communications equipment capable of ensuring full interoperability in communications between units of different countries, resistant to intentional jamming (ECM) and usable from brigade level up to smallest unit of use.
ASCA (Artillery Systems Cooperation Activity) MEADS (Medium-Range Extended Air Defense System) The program is currently in the research/development phase.
Intemational cooperation program (with Belgium, Canada, France, Germany, Holland, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Turkey, United Kingdom and USA) for the definition of development standards to guarantee multinational interoperability between communications systems.
The prototype of the land system, under development, is currently integrated at a national range awaiting the next qualification activity, while the naval one is currently installed on a Navy unit for the same purposes.
PUMA NBC National program aimed at providing the Armed Forces with. an adequate operational capacity, even in environments characterized by the threat of NBC weapons through the acquisition of an armored NBC reconnaissance vehicle, which allows both to detect and transmit data relating to chemical and radiological contamination, and to take samples to evaluate the biological contamination.
Negotiation of the MoU is currently underway.
TACOMS 2000 (Tactical Communications 2000) ____________
NATO LAYERED THEATER BALISTIC MISSILE Intemational cooperation program (with NATO Nations) aimed at defining a NATO Staff Target (NST) and a NATO Staff Requirement (NSR) for an integrated NATO structure intended for layered defense against theater ballistic missiles.
The program is currently in the feasibility study phase, expected to be completed in 2004.
Intemational cooperation program (with Canada, France, Germany, United Kingdom and USA) aimed at multinational interoperability between C2I systems.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The program is currently in the production phase and the expected date of entry into service is 2004 for the land version and 2005 for the naval version.
MIP (Military Interoperability Program)
4.9.2.2 Defense/reaction function
HOWITZER 155 UL Program in intemational cooperation (with France, Germany, the Netherlands, Portugal) for the creation of a helicopter capable of responding to two specific needs: naval use and tactical troop transport.
The program is currently in the development phase.
Intemational cooperation program (with France, Germany, United Kingdom and USA) for multinational interoperability between C2 artillery systems.
Negotiation of the MoU is currently underway.
96


The possibility of starting the definition phase of the aforementioned systems is currently being examined.
Intemational cooperation program (with Canada, France, Germany, Holland, United Kingdom and USA) for the creation of a new tactical-strategic communications system to replace the current Link 11, responsive to new scenarios and usable well beyond the 2000s.
4.9.3.2 PAAMS (Principal Anti Air Missile System) defense/reaction function Intemational cooperation program (with France, Germany, Holland, Norway, Turkey, Great Britain and the USA) aimed at modemizing anti-aircraft defense through the creation of new weapon systems such as SHORAD and V-SHORAD, interoperable in the field of anti-aircraft defense among allied countries.
JPG 28-30 SHORAD - V SHORAD (SHort Range Acquisition Defense System) and V-SHORADS (Very SHOrt Range Acquisition Defense System)
4.9.3 Maritime Component 4.9.3.1 C4I NILE Function (NATO Improved Link Eleven) Andrea Doria aircraft carrier National program aimed at the design and construction of an aircraft carrier capable of ensuring the following functions and potential: high Command, Control and Communication capabilities, flexibility of use of the supplied aircraft as well as the ability to embark a portion of the Landing Force for The program is currently in the development phase and the expected date of entry into service is 2004.
FIGHTER 2000 Intemational cooperation program expected to start with Germany, aimed at modemizing the soldier's equipment and supplies through the use of new technologies in order to increase their operational capacity on the battlefield.
This system, made up of various modules that can be integrated with each other, will allow the fighter's equipment to be adapted to any type of operational scenario (war operations, operations other than war, humanitarian missions, territorial control, etc.) and environmental situation.
The start of construction of two further frigates of the Class is linked to the related financing.
Intemational cooperation program (with the United Kingdom and the USA) for the development of the new ultra-light
155 mm howitzer (155 UL), to equip, in the years 2004-2008, rapidly projectable artillery units with a system characterized by weight and reduced dimensions.
The program is currently in the final definition phase.
Intemational cooperation program (with France) to develop and produce 2 naval units with strong anti-aircraft capabilities meeting the operational, technical and economic requirements of both navies.
The program is currently in the development and construction phase. The expected date of entry into service is 2007/2009. ____________ The possibility of using the system on land, naval (including submarines) and aerial (helicopters) platforms is being studied.
TRIFOM/POLIFEMO Intemational cooperation program (with France and Germany) aimed at creating a fiber optic guided missile system suitable for use against out-of-sight targets (small fortifications, helicopters, tanks).
Frigates HORIZON Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The program is currently in the pre-production phase.
The program is currently in the industrialization phase.
PZH 2000 Intemational cooperation program (with Germany) for the production of the 155 mm PANZERHAUBITZE (PzH 2000) self-propelled gun to equip artillery units with a new technologically advanced self-propelled gun to complement the 3rd generation tank.
Intemational cooperation program (with France and Great Britain) for the qualitative adaptation of embarked weapon systems through the definition, development and production of the main missile system of the "ORIZZONTE" units capable of ensuring point defense, local defense and medium-range area defense against air and missile threats.
97


The current phase of the program will end in 2004.
The program is currently in the development phase.
4.9.3.3 SLAT force protection function (Antitorpedo combat system) National program for the feasibility study and prototypical definition of a medium-caliber projectile equipped with trajectory correction capabilities for the self-defense of naval units against small-sized and highly maneuverable targets, such as anti-ship missiles, aircraft, helicopters and vehicles fast ships.
DAVIDE (Trajectory correction projectile) National program for the creation of a new generation heavy torpedo intended to constitute the main weapon system of the new U212A class submarines.
The program is currently in the production phase for entry into service in 2005.
4.9.4 Air Component 4.9.4.1 C4I ACCS (Air Command and Control System) Function The program is currently in the construction phase and the expected date of entry into service of the Unit is 2008.
NSP (new Heavy Torpedo) National program (initially developed in cooperation with France), for the creation of a missile carrier for the long-distance projection of the MU 90 light torpedo from a naval platform for anti-submarine function. heli-landing operations and to provide operational and logistical support from the sea to the Forces engaged in land operations.
The program is currently in the production phase.
The program is in the development phase: expected entry into service date 2005-2006.
MILAS (Torpedo Launching Missile) ____________
MU 90 Intemational cooperation program (with France) for the creation of a new generation light torpedo, meeting the requirement of both Navies, to be used both alone and as a payload for the MILAS torpedo-carrying missile.
The start of construction of a further two submarines of the Class is linked to the related financing.
Torpedo countermeasures system for U-212A submarine Intemational cooperation program (with Germany) for the development of a new torpedo countermeasures system as part of the acquisition of U-212A submarines.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it Currently, the construction of the first 2 submarines is underway and the foreseeable date of entry into service is 2005/2006.
The program is currently in the development phase.
The program is currently in the validation phase.
4.9.4.2 IRIS-T (Infrared Imaging System
- Tail/Thrust Vector Controlled) defense/reaction function U212A submarines Intemational cooperation program (with Germany) for the construction of 2 new generation submarines meeting the requirements of both navies.
The purpose of the program is to ensure a unitary and real-time Command and Control capability of all the Alliance's air, defensive, offensive and support forces.
Intemational cooperation program (with France) for the protection of naval units from torpedoes through the definition, development and production of a passive type system.
Intemational cooperation program between all NATO countries for the modemization of the entire C2 structure of air operations.
98


ASTRID/JOANNA (Airbome System for Targeting Recognition Identification and Designation) The program is currently in the Development, Production and Logistics phase and the expected date of entry into service is 2003.
STORM SHADOW Intemational cooperation program (with France and the United Kingdom) to develop and produce Stand-Off armament to be installed on Tomado and EF2000 aircraft.
The program is currently in the development phase and the expected date of entry into service is 2010-2012.
Intemational cooperation program (with Germany, the United Kingdom and Spain) to develop, build and support an aircraft with the primary task of countering adversary air forces but which also has a secondary capacity to carry out ground attack missions. With the adoption of "stand-off" armament ("Storm Shadow" missile), the EF-2000 will also be able to strike surface targets with precision at considerable distances.
METEOR Intemational cooperation program (with France, Germany, United Kingdom, Spain and Sweden) for the study, development and production in Europe of a medium-range air-to-air missile with active radar guidance, an altemative to the American AMRAAM missile (AIM-120A ). The Meteor is intended for the EF 2000 I'AM aircraft and other compatible combat aircraft with AMRAAM armament.
4.9.5.Technological research In the field of technological research, the Ministry of Defense has undertaken a series of initiatives aimed at strengthening research by acting according to three main criteria:
- giving the military research sector characteristics of greater autonomy with respect to the development programs of specific armaments, in the belief that technology has "neutral" characteristics compared to its own The expected date of entry into service of the system is 2004.
EF2000 (Euro Fighter 2000) The program is currently in the feasibility phase.
Intemational cooperation program (with Germany, Sweden, Norway, Greece) aimed at defining, developing and producing a short-range air-to-air missile with infrared guidance for use on AM aircraft.
The program is currently in the development phase and the expected service date is 2004.
4.9.4.4 Sustainability/logistics/training function EUROTRAINER Intemational cooperation program (with Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Holland, Portugal, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland) of potentially joint interest for pilot training.
The aim of the program consists in the creation of an integrated system, at European level, of flight training including both the aircraft and the training and support activities ("Eurotrainer+Eurotraining") and which, hopefully, will lead to the creation of a School of European flight. ____________ HARM (High Speed Anti Radiation Missile Precision Navigation) Intemational cooperation program (with Germany and the USA) to develop and produce upgrade kits for the AGM-88B type HARM missiles, currently supplied to the AM for TORNADO aircraft.
Entry into service is scheduled for 2005.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it Negotiation of the MoU for national participation in a technological development program of the JOANNA phase is currently underway. The foreseeable date of entry into service of the system is 2010.
4.9.4.3 TANKER mobility function Acquisition program in which the national industry is engaged in the development of the modification of the chosen aircraft (B767) to give it multi-role transport and in-flight refueling capabilities.
Intemational cooperation program (with France, Spain and the United Kingdom) to develop an electro-optical system for the reconnaissance, identification, designation and tracking of ground targets for use in combination with precision-guided air-to-surface armament (laser).
The program is currently in the development phase and the expected service date is 2003.
99


In the intemational field, Defense's activity and commitment have manifested themselves in an even more sensitive manner due to the dense network of relationships that characterizes the sector at a European and global level. The traditional areas (WEAG, NATO) have been dynamically joined by new ones (Loi, ETAP, etc.), helping to outline a rapidly and extremely competitively evolving framework. oriented primarily towards the aeronautical sector and currently being defined, will commit huge human and financial resources, currently estimated in the order of 20 billion/year (10.33 million) per country for the next Furthermore, Defense actively participated in the study conducted by in preparation of the National Research Plan (PNR) which, starting from the observation of the existence of a "gap" between the Italian, European and, even more so, that of the USA and Japanese, envisaged a series of strategic actions (in particular: a structural action for the strategic repositioning of the national scientific system, an action in the short-medium term for the recovery of efficiency and effectiveness of the intervention tools and an action of a transversal for monitoring and evaluating interventions) and identified the financial resources deemed necessary. The technological priorities identified by the PNR, however, referring to the totality of scientific disciplines, involve only marginally, and always on a "dual" basis, the interests of the Defense which will therefore have to continue to develop and finance research of military interest on its own.
At the national level, the launch of the first national military research program was promoted, which led to the collection of over 228 new research projects relating to the sectors and priorities identified by the Defense General Staff (Directive SMD 004). Among these projects, which cover almost all the technological sectors, the development of which is considered essential to ensure a qualified national presence in the context of future armament programmes, 30 have already been selected, the overall cost of which is estimated to be in the order of the 45 billion, financed in the financial year 2001 or the following.
Following a Franco-British initiative, ETAP was launched with the aim of identifying and jointly conducting those technological research programs that will guarantee the availability of the technologies that the two countries, individually, deem necessary to support their specific programs aircraft of the future. Germany, Sweden, Portugal and Italy were subsequently added to the initial nucleus of France and Great Britain (reconstituting the same group of LOI countries within the ETAP framework). These research programs, In parallel with the attribution, at a legislative level (law on military leaders), to the Secretary General and DNA of the responsibility relating to the development of the sector, the activities already underway were strengthened and new ones were launched in the national and intemational fields.
4.9.5.2 ETAP program (European Technology Acquisition Programme) applications. It is therefore considered necessary to seek maximum synergy between the needs of studies which, although originating from needs linked to different systems or applications, involve identical technological bases; - move towards using all the intellectual and organizational resources available in the country, involving universities, industries and public and private research institutions without limits or distinctions: - considerably increase the financial resources to be allocated to research, pursuing the ultimate goal of aligning national spending with that of the European countries with which Italy aspires to compete.
Italy ensures the contribution of its experts to over 60 working groups, financing their participation. The study activities, however, do not provide specific funding but are conducted on a voluntary and free basis by experts made available by the Alliance countries who selectively decide which studies to take part in and contribute to. The driving force and value of this commitment must therefore be sought in the exchange of information that the network of govemmental and academic experts from the Alliance countries who report to the RTO is able to ensure, since there are no funds dedicated to contracts to assign. The "product" of the Organization, study reports, scientific publications, symposia, etc., is of the highest level and continues to constitute a point of reference for the entire scientific and technological community of NATO countries.
The study and research activity of the RTA is implemented through "Panels" which, by technological sectors, promote the start and conduct of the work of the working groups in which national experts participate. ____________ The RT Board, for the management of research activities, makes use of an Agency (Research & Technology Agency
- RTA) based in Paris.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The NATO RTO promotes and coordinates scientific and technological research activities of military interest within the Atlantic Alliance. The control body of this Organization, of which Italy is an active member, is the "NATO Research & Technology Board" (RT Board) which maintains a double dependence on the Military Committee and the CNAD.
4.9.5.1 NATO RTO (Research & Technology Organisation) 100


The resources necessary to achieve the outlined results appear to be far greater than those actually available, the former having been estimated in the order of 500 billion/year (258.23 million euros), compared to the latter which, currently, have been found to be equal to approximately 40 billion/year (20.65 million euros) of which 20 billion (10.33 million euros) are insured annually for WEAG activities. This situation imposes a "flexible" commitment which, despite being aware of an optimal reference level, is content to finalize programs to the extent possible and consequently accepts a partial and limited achievement of the objectives.
From this point of view, the Italian defense industries must also move towards "cultural modemization", renouncing the imposition of technologies solely developed in-house in certain production sectors and instead taking them where they already exist and perhaps are more cost-effective. .
4.10 CONCLUSIONS/CONSIDERATIONS conducting research activities. The prospect of significant future economies could, on the contrary, require an additional initial investment, not yet estimable, necessary for the setting up of common structures (European Test Centres) which ensure effective and transparent common maintenance of said capabilities.
The current overabundant availability of govemment testing centers specialized in military materials (ranges, technical centers, specialized laboratories) has led to a critical review of their geographical distribution and technological destination in the now unavoidable aim of seeking rationalization on a European scale. There are therefore two active initiatives conducted within WEAG and in a more limited context within a group made up of France, Germany, England and Italy. The search for greater economies must be mediated in light of the safeguarding of testing capabilities which remains at the basis of autonomous capacity After all, many of these technologies are "managed" by the same industries that work in both the civilian and military sectors, and are therefore well suited to generating intemal spin-offs.
4.9.5.3 Test Facilities A sort of "philosophical review" of MILSPEC is already underway by military planners: the tendency is to focus attention on the truly essential aspects, exploiting to a greater extent both the technologies and (in certain cases) the COTS (commercial off the shelf).
4 years and will be framed in a technological perspective that optimizes participation and maximizes its impact.
There are many sectors of civil research that allow strong spill-overs towards the military and vice versa. It is necessary to use the fruits of that research and commercial technologies, without exacerbating the requirements of what were once military specifications. ____________
4.9.5.5 "Dual use" technologies The second possible approach consists in valorising the R&D that comes from the "country system", i.e. that produced by the national R&D plan of the MURST and by the funds of the Ministry of Industry, through the laws which it uses for the promotion of high technologies, even dual ones, using the resources made available by the various laws that regulate this sector with a more in-depth action, oriented in favor of R&D rather than procurement in the strict sense (as has sometimes been done in the emergency) , it could be possible to achieve additional volumes of a certain importance for technological research, in the order of 1,000 billion per year (516.46 million), while at the same time using the funds in a way that is even more in keeping with the spirit of the support laws to the national technological base.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The sector currently has a volume of resources in the order of 250 billion/year (129.12 million euros), compared to the previous 100-120 billion/year (51.64-61.97 million euros): this is indicative of a undoubtedly significant positive trend reversal. However, even more can be done, first of all on the intemal front, by finding resources that are allocated to modemization: 200 billion (103.29 million) less on an acquisition program worth 10,000 billion (5,165 million) an impact that is certainly smaller than what it can mean for research and development to go from 250 to 400/500 billion per year (from 129.12 to 206.59/258.23 million).
4.9.5.4 Funds for research Despite the step forward marked by the Defense budget forecast for the 2001 financial year, Italian spending on research and development remains marginal both in relation to absolute needs and in comparison to how much they invest in the sector Italy's main European partners. Since a serious R&D policy is a preliminary condition for recovering the technological gap that separates Italy from the major allies, to achieve an adequate increase in resources it is necessary to move in two directions: one intemal to Defense as such, and one extemal , i.e. referring to the "country system".
101


Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it is also necessary to invest more in research and development, thus promoting the reduction of the technological and operational "gap" of European military instruments compared to those across the Atlantic.
With pragmatism and gradualness and with the inevitable setbacks, the member countries of the Union have been able to "communitarianize" large sectors of activity that were once typically national, starting with those of an economic and then monetary nature. There have therefore been significant transfers of sovereignty in the various aspects of free circulation and, ultimately, of money.
However, in the area of civilian personnel, professional development must be pursued, facilitating a significant leap in mentality, both at a military and civilian level, to enhance the component of civilian Defense personnel who constitute a very important resource of the military instrument as a whole.
At the same time, however, it appears appropriate and convenient, taking into account the realities of the resources that Europeans dedicate to the defense sector, to seek a healthy and mutually convenient relationship of cooperation with the US defense industry. The Europe of Defense cannot and must not pay a systematic toll, to have those modem operating systems that it needs, to possible logics and sirens of productive autarky, isolating itself from a healthy pressure of competition, in this case predominantly American, and by the positive effects that this competition - in terms of prices and quality - has on European products. It should not be overlooked that, in some specific sectors, the United States has highly sophisticated know-how, which Europe cannot ignore.
Italy, together with other European countries, is pursuing a defense materials policy along a political-operational and industrial path of extensive intemational co-production.
This work of reorganization and modemization of our military instrument, in a European and Atlantic perspective, raises the question of the resources to be allocated to the sector.
From all this arose the need for an armaments policy that is as unitary and coordinated as possible to provide the European Security and Defense Policy (ESDP) with concreteness and effective tools.
In terms of personnel, the available human resources, both military and civilian, do not allow us to adequately cope with the organizational structures and require rationalization in the sense of joint forces and a more effective allocation of competence which today in some areas present some redundancy and a not always clear division of attributions. ____________ The various European bodies, which for the moment co-exist from the WEAG (Westem European Armament Group) up to the OCCAR (Joint Armaments Cooperation Organism) or the structure following the signing of the LOL ("Letter of Intent") will therefore need to be harmonised. ") to finally arrive at the appropriate changes to the EU institutional framework called upon to manage this matter.
To increase European and national strategic capabilities, it will be necessary to give greater impetus to industrial investments, strengthen the Defense-Industry connection, giving more prominence to the joint effort of the institutions and the production sector.
The nascent European dimension of security and defense passes through the pursuit of ever greater effectiveness of military spending, with a view to real planning and standardization of European operational requirements and capabilities, also through the reorganization of the European defense industry.
102


____________
5.3.1 Officers
5.3.2 NonCommissioned
Officers 5.3.3 Troop 5.3.4 Resignations (excluding Carabinieri)
5.1 The military condition The Constitutional Court, in expressing its opinion on the "military condition", has repeatedly reiterated the peculiarity of the situation of the (military) citizen included in the Armed Forces compared to that of other citizens.
5.1 THE MILITARY CONDITION 5.1.1 The fact-finding investigation into the military condition
5.3 CAREER PROCESS (selection, evaluation and criteria) This is because the position of the military citizen is characterized among other things by the strict subjection of the latter to the hierarchical relationship and to military discipline: elements placed at the foundation of the functioning of the Armed Forces themselves. Hierarchical and disciplinary relationships that materialize in precise limits to fundamental rights (such as, for example, the right to strike, expression, association), to subjection to special legislation (the military penal code) and to a specific regulation of discipline.
5.5 THE ACCOMMODATION PROBLEM 5.6
MILITARY REPRESENTATION 5.7 STAFF WELL-BEING 5.8 THE PHENOMENON OF HAZING As an example of the difference existing with the generic nature of public employment, it is reported that the failure by a soldier to carry out a movement from one location to another assumes relevance from a criminal point of view
5.2 RECRUITMENT 5.2.1 The recruitment of enlisted soldiers 5.2.2 The recruitment of non-commissioned officers
5.2.3 The recruitment of special officers 5.2.4 The recruitment of auxiliary officers 5.2.5 The completion forces 5.2.6 Recalls into service from auxiliary 5.2.7 Carabinieri 5.2.8 Female military service 5.2.9 Military chaplains in Italy 5.2.10 Conscientious objection 5.2.11 The balanced force of 2001 and of a humanitarian nature
5.4.5 The difference in the economic treatment of the Italian armed forces compared to the NATO Allies This leads to atypicality in recruitment (normalized, i.e. constancy of intake flows) also connected to constant physical efficiency, the loss of which determines the splitting of the employment relationship (unsuitability for military service), targeted and continuous education and training, a continuous verification of the results achieved and the behavior of the soldier during service (which takes the form of drafting the characteristic documentation), a peculiar and often risky job starting from the training phase, which also involves mobility in the career path unparalleled in the public use. In this regard, it is noted that the movement of the soldier from one location to another falls within the category of military order and therefore does not require any motivation, as it is intrinsic to a matter in which the specific public interest of respect for discipline and service prevails directly and immediately on any other.
5.4 SALARY 5.4.1 Periodic adjustment of salary 5.4.2 Retirement payment 5.4.3 Future developments 5.4.4 Treatment of military personnel engaged in peace operations Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
PART V
MILITARY PERSONNEL 103


sophisticated and expensive weapons systems;
If the burdens mentioned above are in themselves irrepressible because they derive from the typical nature of the military condition (except for those relating to military service, which will be suspended by 2004) it is however possible to reduce or compensate for the resulting inconvenience with appropriate measures.
Solutions to the problems can be indicated in an adaptation of the economic treatment, the rules regarding housing and the well-being of the personnel in general as well as those connected to the functioning of the military representative bodies.
• disciplinary, administrative and criminal responsibilities related to unit command and management In more detail, this set of duties ordinarily entails for career soldiers: military environment, due to its atypical nature with the civilian one;
Generally speaking, what emerged from the various hearings is the need to focus attention on the profound and generalized state of discomfort of military personnel, which has repercussions on their very motivations, with inevitable effects in terms of functionality and operation.
Last but not least, it should not be overlooked that the soldier of every rank, who is part of the Armed Forces, voluntarily or in fulfillment of the obligations established by the law on the draft, with the oath solemnly undertakes to work for the fulfillment of the institutional tasks of the Armed Forces with absolute loyalty to the republican institutions, with discipline and honor, with a sense of responsibility and conscious participation, without saving physical, moral and intellectual energy, facing, if necessary, even the risk of sacrificing their lives (Presidential Decree 545/1986 art. 9). physical and illness due to service. “The conduct of the fact-finding investigation allowed the Commission to deepen its knowledge of the main problems that define the contours and specificity of the condition of military personnel. military, as it falls within the violation of the obligation to immediately execute the order (Article 173 of the CPMP). professionally owned; • possible removal from places of residence and from social and emotional interests.
This must necessarily be taken into account regardless of the defense model to be pursued.
5.1.1 The fact-finding investigation into the military condition It is necessary at this point to also take into consideration the conclusions reached by the Defense Commission of the Chamber of Deputies at the end of the fact-finding investigation into the military condition. Unfortunately, the investigation began at the end of the year 2000 when all the legislative measures on the restructuring of the Armed Forces had already been approved. ____________ Different but also significant burdens are imposed on soldiers on military service: • psychological difficulties in integrating into the social context of the places where they serve and in the same
• economic difficulties, which the very modest salary does not allow one to face; • possible underutilization in unrewarding or less than culturally and technically qualified roles One of the measures with which it is possible to evaluate this psychological attitude of personnel in permanent service can be identified from the rate of resignations from the service of officers in the ranks from captain to lieutenant colonel, where exoduses in the last three years have increased to almost 100%. % of annual admissions in certain roles (pilots, doctors) and in any case significantly high also in other officer specializations. In this regard, it should be noted that these are personnel possessing professionalism for whose preparation the Administration requires years and significant economic resources.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
• limitation and slowness of career depending on the pyramidal structure of the military hierarchy; • greater psycho-physical wear and tear compared to civilian careers and professions and greater risk of accidents in any case an integral part of society. The lack of appreciation by public opinion of the service generally performed or even opposition, for example, towards training activities (which can always be carried out in another location or canceled because they are not deemed necessary) and social protection systems, seen the latter as privileges of the category and not as measures aimed at tempering the typical nature of the military condition, they can certainly influence the staff's affection towards the Institution and therefore make what becomes the weight of the military peculiarity no longer sustainable.
• continuous technical professional updating and retraining; • extreme work and location mobility, with high frequency of transfers. Furthermore, it should not be overlooked that this mobility has repercussions not only on the soldier, but also on his family unit which is often faced with the choice of whether to opt between continuous transfers of headquarters or the distance of the head of the family;
Even within the framework of an entirely professional model, pride in the role performed and in military values remains essential, which remain the true reason for institutional affection for those who have made the choice of a military career.
However, there is no doubt that these subjective factors cannot be preserved by the interventions of military institutions alone, precisely because the military citizen and his family unit are in 104


As emerged during the examination of the individual aspects covered by the investigation.
In practice, the transformation process, in its final configuration, will have to lead to the progressive increase in long-term voluntary staff, from the few thousand in service in the early 1990s to over 50,000 units present at the beginning of 2001, and to contextual, progressive reduction of enlisted personnel, at the end of the transition.
With the recent approval of the new regulatory body, the pillars for the transformation of the military instrument have
been laid:
As emerged during the fact-finding investigation, there are numerous and significant profiles for possible interventions.
It is therefore clear that the great innovations underway make the need to concentrate attention on issues relating to the condition of military personnel, or on the human factor, as a fundamental and decisive factor of any reform, more pressing.
At the same time as this contraction, the Carabinieri, whose total strength is currently attested to 116,345 units, was elevated to the rank of FA.
These reforms, defined by many as "epochal", found their culmination in the approval of law 331 of 14 November 2000 which established the professional military service. They are therefore aimed at the profound transformation of our military instrument, which has proved indispensable for the presence and influence of Italy's role within the contexts of the European Union and the Atlantic Alliance.
FF.AA., as a first step, led to the quantitative reduction of the instrument through a significant contraction of personnel (from 350,000 to approximately 250,000) introducing a form of feeding for the troops altemative to the draft and based on professional criteria (mixed model), balanced and calibrated on a minority professional component and, subsequently, with the suspension of the draft, on a model of professional soldiers for a total of 190,000 units. • This situation is particularly jarring with the massive restructuring process of the Armed Forces, which began in this legislature, with the approval of reforms, which also saw the Commission as a protagonist in the legislative activity.
5.2 Recruitment Since the end of the 1990s, the "defense sector" has been affected by a transformation process which for Furthermore, the progressive "professionalization" of the FF.AA. will make it possible to entrust certain tasks traditionally carried out by long-serving personnel (and therefore still carried out by the Marshals) to the personnel of • ____________ The considerations of the Constitutional Court and the conclusions of the fact-finding investigation of the Chamber of Deputies fully represent the picture of the ethical-moral situation of the Armed Forces which in the five years of the legislature were subjected to "epochal reforms" suffered and endured with an extreme sense of discipline but with just as many inconveniences that have led to demoralization and demotivation.
These elements must be kept in mind for what will be the completion of the restructuring to be configured also in the sense of reparation of some measures that have proven to be of dubious effectiveness.
In the long term, expiring in 2020, in the category of Non-Commissioned Officers, Marshals role, what in technical jargon is defined as "the adjustment of the role" will take place through a cut in the workforce equal to approximately 40,000 units.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it In any case, it is necessary to address the topics discussed with the same incisiveness with which the structural reforms of the Armed Forces were addressed, in order to guarantee the military instrument the functionality necessary to ensure the purposes assigned to it, also within the framework of the obligations arising for Italy by its membership in the European Union and NATO".
In particular, legislative decree no. 215/2001 regulates, in line with the delegating law (cited law 331/2000), the distribution of human resources both between the three FF.AA. (Army, Navy and Air Force) and in the individual personnel categories (Officers, Non-Commissioned Officers and enlisted personnel). In particular, as of 1 January 2005, the overall number of military personnel in service must be reduced to 112,000 units for the Army, 34,000 for the Navy (with the exclusion of the Port Authority Corps) and 44,000 for the Air Force , for a total of 190,000 military personnel, a reference ceiling already defined by the aforementioned enabling law. As regards the category of enlisted soldiers, according to the spirit of the law, the over 100,000 conscripts in service in 2001 will be progressively reduced until they disappear in 2007, while at the same time there will be an increase in personnel in voluntary service.
They can form the basis for regulatory interventions to be implemented in the current legislature or to be developed starting from the next one. the reorganization of the roles of Officers (Legislative Decree no. 490/97 and 216/2000) which also involved the cutting of approximately 8,000 positions in the various Corps or Arms; the "professional only" model (L. n. 331/2000), made fully enforceable by legislative decree n. 215/2001, published last June.
105


reference to marshals.
A further improvement in the situation was achieved in 1986 when, with law no. 958 of 24 December, the "Reform of the military service" was approved, thanks to which the aforementioned percentage of "volunteers" was increased to 19%.
But to have a rule that would allow a larger influx of volunteers and, at the same time, outline the career progression of these young people who chose the path of arms, we must wait for Legislative Decree 12 May 1995 n. 196, with which the current figures of:
Among the most important issues for the effective achievement of the model, the achievement of particular importance was assessed as: • the targets for recruiting volunteers into the roles of enlisted soldiers, which is dealt with more extensively elsewhere in this document; • the progressive and orderly disposal of surpluses in redundant roles, with particular Once the transformation is complete, the military structure will be made up of approximately 22,250 Officers, 25,000 Marshals, 38,500 Sergeants and 104,000 enlisted personnel (in permanent service, on pre-arranged duty or on a temporary basis).
Subsequently, with law 31 May 1975 n. 191, the VAS were replaced by the figure of the Volunteer Technical Operators on a two-year basis with an enlistment limit equal to 16% of the armed forces, a limit which was never reached.
AND THE VOLUNTEERS IN SP
MM - VOLUNTEERS IN SP For the Officers category, the current policy of contraction of numbers and military leadership will continue, started already in 1997 with another legal instrument (Legislative Decree 30 December 1997, n.490).
To meet the need for specialized personnel and compensate for the decline in the number of recruits, a first attempt was made on 14
February 1964 with Presidential Decree no. 237 which concemed the Specialized Student Volunteers (VAS). at 60 years of age. troops in permanent service or Sergeants. The latter, in particular, will continue to come from troops volunteers in permanent service.
The first phenomenon that had a progressive and negative impact on recruitment possibilities was that of conscientious objection which reached a peak of 108,000 applications at the end of the 1990s.
MM - VOLUNTEERS IN FB
• Volunteers in Permanent Service (VSP): classified in a specific role and with up to 100% career opportunities ____________ It is therefore imperative to avoid this eventuality should it occur, also through further legislative interventions that may be deemed necessary.
5.2.1 The recruitment of enlisted soldiers The recruitment system based mainly on compulsory conscription - within the definition given by the Constitution to the defense of the homeland as a "sacred duty of the citizen" - has undergone numerous variations over the years supported by specific legislative rules.
AND THE VOLUNTEERS ON FB Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it Having said this, Legislative Decree no. 215/2001 provides that, if the surplus management process does not achieve the set reduction objectives, the residual surpluses are counted among the staff presences, i.e. using economic resources to the detriment of those instead reserved for the recruitment of voluntary staff troop. In essence, there could be a slowdown in the recruitment of volunteer enlisted personnel to the detriment of the continued service of other category personnel and with higher costs and higher age (a marshal, under current legislation, costs as much as 2.5 enlisted volunteers in short) but not usefully usable within the professional model. based on AF needs at 5 years;
With regard to the problem of surpluses, the legal provisions provide, if not in line with the reductive trend identified by the technical report to the provision, the activation of particular "vehicles" such as transit in other State Administrations or local authorities or, if this transit proves insufficient, through early placement in auxiliary, however limiting the activation of this institution to only surplus personnel who are less than five years from the age limits.
• Volunteer on Short Service (VFB): with initial duration of service of three years, extendable upon request and 106


In this context, the recruitment of troop volunteers takes place with the typologies indicated below:
• Volunteers on annual leave (VFA) Ultimately, at the moment I am serving in the FF.AA. Volunteers: ol on annual leave; or in short; or stale; or in permanent service.
The same legislative instrument introduced the possibility for short-term volunteers to take advantage of further biennial renewals. • A further new figure, that of the Volunteer on Annual Leave (VFA), introduced with the conversion into law of the Legislative Decree relating to Italian participation in NATO operations in Macedonia and Albania (DL 21 April 1999, n.110 converted with the law 18 June 1999, n.186), has been added to the aforementioned categories. The particular duration of the service, one year, and the close relationship with the pool of available military personnel, characterize the legal figure. • Based on this indication, the selection activities will be carried out at the relevant selection centers (Fig. n.1). •
AM VOLUNTEERS IN SP
In 1997 (Presidential Decree no. 332/1997), the application methods for the recruitment of VFBs were regulated.
Following this, it is possible to enlist, as VFB, both young people in military service and personnel who have not yet been called up to arms. Said personnel can be aged between 17 and 22 (limit raised to 23 for young military personnel already discharged). These provisions on the enlistment of the VFB allow young people who apply to orient their choices right from the start towards a future career in the ranks of the FF.AA. or the civil and military police forces, the fire brigade, the military corps of the Red Cross.
In particular, at the moment, when submitting the application, young people indicate which FA or police force they would like to join at the end of their short term (on average after 4 years), subjecting themselves to selection by the body to which they are applying. ____________ Finally with law n. 331 of 14 November 2000, the category was reorganized with a view to professionalizing the military
instrument, providing for: the Volunteer on fixed leave for 1 year, who will replace the volunteer on annual leave starting from 1 January 2007, i.e. at the same time as the suspension of military service; the Volunteer on a fixed 5-year contract, who progressively replaces the volunteer on a short contract; the Volunteer in reentry: following the choice to contract one or two-year re-staffs after completing the contracted contract.
• Volunteers on short notice (VFB) Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The selection and recruitment procedures have been made very simple. For example, in the Army, the selection takes place on the basis of the psycho-physical and aptitude requirements possessed by the candidates, the places available in the Departments, to be filled with said type of personnel, and the date and time of submission of the application.
As regards the recruitment of this type of volunteers, the system identified responds to extremely simple criteria and is aimed at allowing the citizen to be able to carry out the service, if suitable, in a short time from the date of submission of the application (approximately one month ) and, within the limit of available places and depending on the Regiments to be fed, within the chosen Regiment. In practice, all citizens not yet in arms, in arms or already discharged, aged between 17 and 28, can be enlisted as VFAs. Applications for enlistment must be submitted to: the Military District to which they belong or to the command of the Regiment chosen to carry out the service, for young people not yet in arms or discharged; The relevant department, for military conscripts. For this category of personnel, the military service performed is not counted as useful service for carrying out the annual voluntary service.
VSP CONSISTENCES
VFA CONSISTENCES 107
VFB CONSISTENCES


Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The figure of the VSP, as mentioned, was established in 1995 with the same provision that established the VFBs (Legislative Decree no. 196/95 and subsequent amendments/integrations). With this provision, therefore, a "communicating system" was designed, from the bottom up, according to which the VSPs can be drawn exclusively from the VFBs (fig. n.3), which have requested them and have provided service without demerit for at least two years in the FA in which they ask to be enrolled.
These activities include: • a cultural pre-selection, at middle school level (minimum qualification required); • health checks aimed at verifying possession of the required physical requirements; • psycho-aptitude assessments.
In summary, the recruitment system adopted is a "communicating" system, so to speak, which, by providing for transits/transfers, not only for the role of VSPs, but also for the roles of Sergeants and Warrant Officers, creates a sort of osmosis between roles, which avoids the dispersion of the experience gained by the VFBs during their period of inactivity, allows its profitable use to the advantage of the FAs and allows, at the same time, to materialize a meritocratic system, through which it becomes possible for a volunteer aspire to improve one's "status".
At the moment, however, as has already been said, it has not been possible to entirely satisfy the need for volunteer recruitment with "preferential" competitions, pursuant to Presidential Decree no. 332/97. This has, therefore, led to the adoption of more rapid complementary competitive procedures, which provide for selection only in the single FA context, and are effective for the functionality of the FF.AA. same. Furthermore, these procedures offer employment guarantees that are still uncertain.
• Volunteers on permanent duty (VSP) At the moment, the possibilities of entering the world of work reserved for young people who carry out voluntary military service are connected to the completion of the expected service (currently three years - VFB, in the near future five years - VFP). These possibilities are: o short-term admission ranking; o aptitude and performance during the service carried out in the short term; o moral and cultural qualities; o outcome of education, specialization or qualification courses; o number and type of specializations/qualifications obtained; o educational qualification and/or professional qualification held.
Entry into the VSP role takes place on the basis of a merit ranking, drawn up by a specific The reintegration into the world of work of volunteer soldiers discharged without demerit constitutes, following the recent professionalisation of the Armed Forces, one of the fundamental objectives of the Defence. The availability of this type of personnel, the new comerstone of the professional military tool, is directly related to the success of this project, which will have to make the recruitment of volunteers attractive in the short term also through valid employment guarantees at the end of the contract. ____________ Commission and based on the following parameters, which shows the "specific weight" attributed to the various activities carried out and the performance offered during the service:
The candidates found suitable and successful in the competition complete a three-year service at one of the three FF.AA., at the end of which, based on the initial selection data and the performance provided in the three years of service, specific rankings will be drawn up, on the basis of which the best Volunteers will be placed in the role of VSP of their FA, or in the initial roles of the Police Forces or other Administrations. This system, essentially, makes possible an employment opportunity, at the end of the shutdown, for an appreciable amount of VFB (Fig. n.2).
FIGURE 3
FIGURE 1
FIGURE 2 108


On the other hand, the attitude of young Italians towards military volunteering should not be overlooked, who, despite high levels of youth unemployment, present at least in certain geographical areas of the country, are not attracted to enlisting and do not adequately satisfy the current demand for volunteer staff.
The new mechanism for placing soldiers in operational departments - for formations call frequency: monthly; number of brackets: 12 per year; entry of recruits into the employment units: generally quarterly, i.e. entry by "modules" equal to 1 company/squadron/battery and 1/3 of the remaining tactical counters (support weapons company, anti-aircraft artillery batteries, special equipment company) and logistics (company/squadron/battery of the State, Regions, Provinces and Municipalities.
Ministry of Defence; o 30% reserve in competition notices for hiring in administrations, companies, bodies and institutes imposed the implementation of organic - training measures with the aim of ensuring that the units have levels of effective and operational strength adequate for the tasks that they must carry out. To this end, starting from the 1st echelon of 1998, a new supply system was adopted for the operational departments based on lever and already supplied with the "single echelon" company/squadron/ battery system. This system aims to overcome the traditional division of compulsory stops into "instructive" and "operational", to move on to a training-operational formula developed entirely in the employment departments. o reservation of 50% of the positions annually advertised in the civil roles of non-managerial staff of the o Differentiated power supply of the units. The reduction of the military service from 12 to 10 months has ol transit into the permanent service of the FF.AA. (Army, Navy, Air Force). It should be highlighted that in the immediate future the extent of this transit can/should presumably be increased considering that the professionalization process will require the adoption, in the first years of implementation, of a power supply module superior to the normal one; ol inclusion in the initial roles of the Police Forces/Administrations interested in the Regulation on the recruitment of volunteers (Presidential Decree 332/97 and subsequent amendments), taking advantage of the reserve of places in force (70% in the Carabinieri and the Guardia di Finanza; 60% in the Penitentiary Police; 45% in the State Forestry Corps, State Police, National Fire Brigade; 100% in the Red Cross Military Corps);
These procedures provide for the division of the call into four contingents, which are in tum divided into three brackets. The dates of call-up, discharge from the Units and Bodies responsible for the incorporation and basic training of recruits, discharge from the scholastic bodies responsible for specialization training and discharge of the draft bands, are defined with specific Circulars. Any movement, in derogation of the provisions of the FACL, can be decided by the General Directorate of Leverage and Compulsory Recruitment (LEVADIFE), until incorporation, or by the General Directorate for Military Personnel (PERSOMIL), after incorporation, in acceptance of a specific request in the foreseen cases. ____________ Ultimately, the need to find further employment opportunities in the civilian world derives mainly from the fact that the reservations of places foreseen for volunteers in the Police Force have been substantially disregarded in the past due to the excessive selection carried out by this latest and from the possibility offered to them of being able to fill any vacancies registered in joint competitions through ordinary competitions intended for civilian personnel.
The military service. The call-up of conscripts to arms is carried out using IT procedures which, as a whole, are defined as: "Automated Training of the Conscript Contingent" (FACL). homogeneous "single tier" at company level - is characterized by the following aspects:
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it This structure makes use of the peripheral defense bodies, acquires information from the Department of Public Function, manages relations with public and private employers and stipulates agreements with the aforementioned employers, with subjects competent in the field of employment promotion . • The recruitment of volunteers is also carried out through an inter-force competition which involves the Police Forces and State Administrations in the selection process which, at the end of the detention, "absorb" only a percentage of those eligible, leaving the remainder without the possibility of direct placement of the staff. To reduce these negative aspects, with the aforementioned "Professional" law, a "structure" competent to carry out information, promotional and coordination activities was established within the Ministry of Defense in order to evaluate the progress of personnel recruitment voluntary service and to facilitate the entry into the world of work of military volunteers discharged without demerit.
Command and Services and Headquarters Department);
109


Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it or Extra quota rate. In order to preventively compensate for the losses, which statistically occur before the incorporation, the precepts are increased by a personnel rate, defined as the "Extra Quota Rate" (AEQ). The "extra quota" staff is employed by the organizations that have incorporated them to make up for/mitigate, as a matter of priority, no-shows, replacing pre-designated individuals who have not arrived with elements of the same role.
5.2.2 The recruitment of non-commissioned officers The category was the subject of a profound structural reform introduced with the decree on the reorganization of the roles of non-managerial personnel of the Armed Forces. (so-called “equiordination” - Legislative Decree 196/95).
With this measure, in fact, the pre-existing unified role was divided into
two separate roles:
• Sergeants role; • Role of Marshals; at the same time modifying the rules of recruitment, legal status and advancement.
The role of Sergeants constitutes the natural career progression of the personnel of the role of Troop Volunteers in permanent service, from which they are exclusively nourished through intemal competition and passing a specific professional refresher course.
At the same time as the remodulation of the rules on postponement, further rules are introduced regarding exemption from the draft in favor of those young people already effectively introduced into the world of work and/or attending particular post-graduate university courses, namely: incorporation: two per month, fortnightly at the 4 Leva Incorporation Centers (CIL), responsible for carrying out only incorporation operations and training activities aimed at giving the conscript a first "military" appearance. or holders of a scholarship or research grant for graduates, lasting at least one year in the case of attending a research doctorate at legally recognized universities.
With the transition to "professional", 2004 will be the last year of compulsory military service for Italian citizens belonging to the classes of 1985 and earlier. Until that date, despite the general, progressive decrease in the annual revenue from the "Draft", recruitment will be subject to appropriate "shock absorbers" such as the regionalization of military service (which will primarily affect personnel residing within 100 km of the place of assignment ) or, if this is not possible, the right to reimbursement of travel expenses. On the other hand, to safeguard the functionality and efficiency of the military instrument in this delicate and sensitive phase of transformation, more restrictive conditions have been introduced for the purposes of achieving delays in the call-up to arms for study reasons, to avoid, for example, that the enrollment at university alone constitutes a reason for delay and consequently, de facto, exemption from military service. In practice, in the two/three years preceding the suspension of the draft, those who have benefited from the deferment in previous years will be called to arms (the "natural" call to arms of the class of 1985 would take place no later than the first months of 2004 ). from military service, but in line with the principle of giving priority to those who are already in the world of work, the Minister of Defense with his own decree has the power to extend exemption from military service to them. ____________ those who are directly responsible for running a business or economic activity for at least one year or for a business started with the support provided by institutions or public bodies regarding the promotion of youth entrepreneurship and self-employment;
Finally, only in apparent contrast with the aforementioned need to place a limit on "easy" exemptions No changes to the assignments can be made from the peripheral commands. Any proposals and/or variations to the assignment planning must be forwarded by the responsible Commands to the SME and to PERSOMIL, without prejudice to the fact that all nominative variations to the destinations and assignments reported in the printouts, carried out by the bodies responsible for basic training, must be communicated to the General Management according to the established procedures.
MM ROLE OF SERGEANTS 110
AM - ROLE OF SERGEANTS
EI - ROLE OF SERGEANTS


Students, during which they attend the appropriate training course, are appointed Marshals.
As already indicated previously, recruitment for the Special Role takes place through a competition reserved for Marshals in service and complement Officers.
AM DIRECTLY APPOINTED OFFICERS Auxiliaries: see 4.2.4) for recruitment into special roles.
MM - DIRECTLY APPOINTED OFFICERS The role of Marshals, however, is supported by students coming from the Non-Commissioned Officer Schools, drawn, through a specific competition, from young graduates (to an extent not exceeding 70% of the places available for competition), from personnel coming from the role of Sergeants (for the 10% of the positions), as well as by qualified personnel belonging to the role of Troop Volunteers in permanent service (for 20% of the positions) with at least 7 years of service, of which at least four were carried out in permanent service. The winners of the competition, after two years of stopping as
• through a competition reserved for officers in service and the Complementary Officers (in the future to the Officers
RECRUITMENT OF AIR FORCE OFFICERS
EI - DIRECTLY APPOINTED OFFICERS ____________
• directly from young graduates in possession of specific qualifications of interest to
RECRUITMENT OF NAVY SPE OFFICERS the Administration, for recruitment especially in logistical and technical roles;
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it In this framework, recruitment takes place:
• through the Military Academies (Modena for the EI and the CC, Livomo for the MM and Pozzuoli for the AM), in most of the normal roles;
ROLES
5.2.3 The recruitment of officers in spe The recruitment of officers takes place with similar methods in the 3 FF.AA., it being understood that the selection and training procedures are managed by the individual FA in relation to the typical functional and organizational needs to be ensured.
SOURCES OF RECRUITMENT VARY DEPENDING ON THE ARMED FORCE AND THEM
NAVAL ACADEMY
AIR FORCE ACADEMY
MM - ROLE OF MARSHALS
EI - MILITARY ACADEMY 111
AM ROLE OF MARSHALS
AND THE ROLE OF MARSHALS


• officers on pre-arranged orders, destined to carry out those specific needs of the individual FA connected to the lack of professionalism or the need to deal with particular operational needs. At the end of their service, the officers will be able to access competitions for recruitment into the permanent service or in any case will accrue an incremental score for hiring in public competitions;
The completion of Law 228/2000 (conceming "Urgent provisions regarding the extension of Italian military participation in intemational peacekeeping missions") has legitimized the CEO to recall, on
5.2.4 The recruitment of auxiliary officers This category, introduced by enabling law 331/2000, is intended to replace in the future the reserve officers who, being linked to compulsory conscription, will no longer be able to be recruited starting from 2006. This category, specifically regulatory provision, is not included in the professional model. It includes: • first-appointed or re-appointed reserve officers in service who will continue to be recruited from among young people subject to military service (and therefore bom before 1985), for the performance of the traditional tasks assigned to this category of personnel ; • the supplementary pilot officers on twelve-year terms, to which Italian citizens will be able to access according to the methods already in force (direct recruitment through public competition), necessary for the functionality of the FA as they are destined almost exclusively and continuously for the operational line, not being subject to the obligations of Command and attendance of refresher courses provided for officers of normal roles;
AM - SPECIAL ROLE OFFICERS The completion of said Commands/Entities/Units is implemented through measures planned since peacetime aimed at establishing the "Completion Forces" with military personnel coming from leave.
MM - SPECIAL ROLE OFFICERS
5.2.5 Completion forces In compliance with art. 1 of Legislative Decree 464/97 (conceming the "structural reform of the FF.AA."), the mobilization arrangements are currently referable only to the completion of the existing Commands, Bodies and Units.
AND THE SPECIAL ROLE OFFICERS
AM COMPLEMENTARY OFFICERS ____________
MM COMPLEMENTARY OFFICERS
EI - COMPLEMENTARY OFFICERS Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it In essence, the auxiliary officers represent that pool of professionalism functional to the efficiency of those sectors of the individual FF.AA. orderly complementary and temporally contingent, therefore indispensable for the full achievement of institutional objectives. For what has been said, the quantitative and qualitative determination of the aforementioned Officers is only possible in the short term (normally, on an annual basis through the Budget law) functional, as the need materializes, to the increase in the numbers of certain roles to face the most various operational commitments as well as the maintenance of the category of leave, even after 2005, or the possible reinstatement of compulsory conscription in the cases provided for by law (proclamation of a state of war or serious intemational crisis in which the nation or a State is directly involved ally).
• the officers of the completion forces, i.e. the officers on leave recalled to duty, with the consent of the interested parties, for the fulfillment of the needs related to intemational missions or with training, operational and logistical activities both on the national territory and abroad .
112


forewaming.
In the spirit of these regulations, which tend to ensure the most profitable use of personnel possessing vast experience and strong professional ability, in the presence of significant deficiencies with respect to organic resources, especially for the Carabinieri, it may be necessary to continue to have, in the coming years, of balanced calls into service from the auxiliary, essential to guarantee the full functionality of the departments.
5.2.7 Carabinieri • Officers The main innovation in the sector therefore consists in the introduction of the new figure of the "reservist" who - on a voluntary basis - has provided, upon termination of service or at a later date, an initial generic availability for recall and who adheres to the actual call up to arms only after receiving a Currently, the new regulatory vehicle has been used only by the Army, which has made use of it for operational needs both on the national territory and abroad (competitions in public order activities and/or natural disasters, support for humanitarian operations, “peace keeping”, etc.).
The aforementioned decrees provide, in particular, for a gradual raising of the age limits for termination of permanent service, until reaching a "normalisation" in the year 2008 when the age limit will coincide with the completion of the 60th year, with the prospect to remain in the auxiliary for a further 5 years.
The regulation specifies that "the said personnel, included in the completion forces, are employed in training, operational and logistical activities both on the national territory and abroad"; It therefore appears legitimate not only for the CEO to establish a "catchment area" called "completion forces", but also for his own "management" of said "basin".
5.2.6 Recalls into service from the auxiliary Legislative decrees 165/97 and 498/97 have revisited the institution of recalls into service, following the entry into force of new regulations aimed at reducing and containing redundancies from the public sector , through the raising of the minimum contribution and age requirements for access to the pension. voluntary and fixed-term basis, the Cpl. Officers and Non-Commissioned Officers. on leave, as well as personnel already belonging to the categories of troops in military service and VFB.
The "Selected Reserve" also contributes to the composition of the voluntary completion forces, made up of specialized personnel in possession of particular professional skills of interest to the Armed Force not found in the military sector (interpreters, technicians, doctors, legal consultants, etc.). Said personnel are found directly among civilians, or among ex-military personnel, who - after signing the availability to be called up to arms - are given, without competition, the appointment of Complementary Officer up to the rank of Major, pursuant to the combined provisions of the 'art. 4 of RD 819/1932 and art. 31 of Legislative Decree 490/1997.
The officers of the technical logistics role are recruited among young graduates, in possession of specific professional skills (doctors, pharmacists, veterinarians, chemists, physicists, etc.). Regarding career profiles, the officers of the role follow methods similar to those envisaged for the other FF.AA.. ____________
• Forces for general completion: they are formed in an emergency through measures of a coercive nature - planned since peacetime - essentially conceming the blocking of discharges and/or the recall to arms of military personnel on leave, starting from the younger classes ;
• Voluntary completion forces: they are formed to meet particular operational/training needs, with military personnel on leave who can be recalled on a voluntary basis. Adherence to the call to arms is signed by the interested party during the period of service at the organization to which he belongs, or in the position of discharge at the Military District of his jurisdiction.
The officers of the special role, similarly to the other Armed Forces, are drawn from the role of inspectors and, residually, from the complement officers.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it In summary, the aforementioned Completion Forces are divided into:
Normal role Officers are recruited through the Military Academy. At the end of the two-year period, the cycle of studies continues at the Carabinieri Officers School.
The employment relationship with the "reservist" is for a fixed term and is based on the voluntary recall by the interested party. The termination of this relationship is, therefore, implemented immediately following a request from the interested party.
Legislative Decree 298/2000 set the new staffing of officers at 3,800 units in total, of which: 1,880 of the normal role, 1,510 of the special role (including, in the transitional period, also the officers of the exhaustion role and of the technical role -operational) and 410 of the technical-logistical role.
113


Quarterly Course: 30% of places reserved for staff belonging to the role
CC COMPLEMENTARY OFFICERS Police officers and Carabinieri;
CC TECHNICAL OFFICIALS
CC - SPECIAL ROLE OFFICERS
Since 2002, applying the changes provided for by Legislative Decree 83/2001, the introduction
CC ROLE OF SUPERINTENDENTS
• Volunteers or
HALF YEARLY
RECRUITMENT OF OFFICERS
Superintendents:
From 1996 to 2001, entry into the role took place exclusively (Legislative Decree 198/95) with a single competition reserved for personnel belonging to the Officers and Carabinieri role (70% reserved for chosen Officers - 30% reserved for Officers and Carabinieri) .
BIENNIAL ____________ As regards recruitment, the same occurs with methods similar to those envisaged for the roles of marshals and sergeants of the other Armed Forces, without prejudice to the fact that the selection procedures and training of personnel takes place through the specific institutes of the Carabinieri. .
o Inspectors:
Two-year course: 70% of places reserved for civilian/Army candidates (from the 6th two-year course
2001 - 2003 there is a limitation of 20% reserved for women); Six-month course: 30% of places reserved for military candidates of the Corps.
CC ROLE OF INSPECTORS Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it In general, the non-managerial and non-executive staff of the Army (Role of Inspectors, Role of Superintendents, Role of Officers and Carabinieri), dates back to the direct management of the General Command limited to the branches of status, advancement and, in part, employment . In the discipline and documentation sectors, the aforementioned personnel are instead directly managed by the competent Corps commands who also exercise, within the limits indicated in the following paragraph, the employment function.
Refresher and Professional Training Course: 70% of places reserved for Selected Appointees.
Difficulties, however, have emerged in the management of transits of volunteers at pre-arranged stops or at short stops of the FF.AA.: the related investigations are still underway.
• Inspectors and Superintendents The overall resources, organic and extra-organic, assign to the force a sufficient number of soldiers to cope with the complex and diversified institutional tasks, which determine continuous needs for qualitative growth of the instrument. takes place with two distinct competitions:
The Carabinieri Corps provides for its initial role (actual Carabinieri), through the recruitment of: l volunteers in prearranged and short-term stops of the Armed Forces, to whom art. 18 of the Legislative Decree. n.215/2001 reserves 70% of the annual hiring scheduled for the role; the winners of the competition, who are admitted to the four-year term, in accordance with the provisions of art. 5 of Legislative Decree no. 198/1995; l Carabinieri in military service and on two-year terms (art.21 of L.958/1986), who can remain in service, upon request, as effective Carabinieri, within the limits of organic vacancies.
The force has not yet encountered any particular problems with the recruitment of actual Carabinieri, in relation to the revenue from applications, which has consistently remained at levels far higher than the places available.
CC MILITARY ACADEMY
CC ROLE OF INSPECTORS 114


5.2.8 Female military service Since the Second World War, and with greater frequency since the early 1970s, there have been numerous legislative proposals that resonate between the Senate and the Chamber of Deputies; they all take inspiration from two articles of the Constitution which read: art.
3 “All citizens have equal social dignity and are equal before the law, without distinctions of sex, race, language, religion, political opinions, personal and social conditions”; art. 52 “The defense of the homeland is a sacred duty of the citizen. Military service is compulsory within the limits and in the manner established by law. Its fulfillment does not prejudice the citizen's employment position or the exercise of political rights. The organization of the FF.AA. is informed by the democratic spirit of the Republic". It is interesting to highlight how, from the beginning and in whatever form they were formulated, these bills were presented by representatives of all political orientations. • Since then, the numbers have risen to the current 12,000 units (not included in the organic volumes and assigned by budget law) for which, with the
AUXILIARY CARABINIERS (four-year term) The Auxiliary Carabinieri The figure of the auxiliary Carabinieri was introduced in 1963 with volunteer personnel drawn from the conscription contingents and employed, for all intents and purposes, with tasks similar to those of the actual personnel.
AUXILIARY CARABINIERS (two-year stop)
ACTUAL CARABINIERI
VOLUNTEERS IN FB FOR THE CARABINIERI or to the prospect of suspension of military service, which has increased the use of the institution of postponement; or to the less favorable economic treatment attributed to such personnel by law no. 662/1996 (to students, in the 12 weeks of the course: 168,600 lire per month, instead of 1,054,035 paid in the past; in the remaining nine months:
935,000 lire, instead of the 1,200,000 previously paid).
With this law, to translate the hiring of female staff into a concrete possibility, the Govemment was delegated to issue one
or more legislative decrees:
• Legislative Decree 31 January 2000, n. 24, aimed at regulating recruitment, legal status and advancement, • mainly inspired by the realization of the principle of equal opportunities between men and women; ____________ consciousness"; or to the growing number of young people who opt for the civilian substitute service or declare themselves "objectors of Finally, thirty-seven years later, with the law of 20 October 1999, the possibility was established for Italian citizens to participate, on a voluntary basis, in competitions for the recruitment of Officers, Non-Commissioned Officers in permanent service and enlisted soldiers in voluntary service, in roles of the FF.AA. and the Financial Police.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it Of particular relevance, again on the subject of auxiliaries, is the problem of the progressive, significant decline in the
number of aspirants mainly due to:
Going through the numerous projects that have followed one another since 1970, we reach 1997, for the definitive approval of the law that delegates the Govemment to the institution of women's voluntary military service. transformation of the military from mixed to professional, the progressive replacement with 9,000 effective Carabinieri is being defined.
It can, in fact, be said that women have seen the doors of the FF.AA open. by will of the political power. It was Parliament, and with it the Govemment, that chose, independently of the popular will itself, which never expressed itself clearly on the issue nor exerted pressure. It was a painful choice, whose path unfolded for almost thirty years; a choice that looked at the sociological aspect, motivated by the need to bring the Armed Forces closer together. to society itself and make it a more faithful reflection of the composition of the Italian population.
115
AUXILIARY CARABINIERS


Made up of 11 members, mostly female, with adequate experience and expertise in the matter, it has the task of assisting the Chief of Defense Staff and the General Commander of the Guardia di Finanza in the action of direction, coordination and evaluation of the inclusion and integration of female personnel in the Armed Forces. approximately 1,253 units, taking into account that two extraordinary competitions have been announced for short-term Army volunteers.
In compliance with the enabling law, the Minister of Defence, in agreement with the Minister of Economy and Finance and the Minister for Equal Opportunities, has established an Advisory Committee by decree.
This decree for the current year provides for an opening of 20% of recruitment for Officer Cadets of the Academies, of 100% in "direct appointment" competitions (directly from young graduates from the civilian world) of the Army, Air Force and Carabinieri and, between 20 and 50% in the same competitions for the Navy; 20% opening in competitions for marshal students, also a percentage of 30% in any extraordinary competitions for the recruitment of volunteers on short notice.
The number of places available for female staff is overall equal specialties and specializations in which female personnel are recruited every year.
For the current year, the same competitions announced during 2000 have been announced (approximately the same number of places available for female personnel) with the addition of the recruitment of marshal students.
• Decree 4 April 2000, n. 114, containing rules for ascertaining suitability for military service; • Annual Ministerial Decree, relating to the definition of rates, roles, bodies, categories,
5.2.9 Military chaplains in Italy ____________ of the GdF (Officer Cadets to be drawn from young civilian graduates); • "direct appointment" recruitment (access with the rank of Lieutenant, directly from young graduates); • recruitment of short-term volunteers in the Army, in consideration of the regulatory provision to carry out extraordinary competitions for said recruitment if the ordinary competition does not completely fill the positions.
Overall, these first recruitments (396 units in service) provided decidedly positive feedback: almost all of the positions put up for competition were filled. This was mainly due to the high number of requests for participation from female staff.
As regards the near future (short-medium term), the line of action identified at the joint force level is based on maintaining the current percentage rates, in the consideration that in addition to the still existing logistical/structural needs, which do not allow immediate increases in the recruitment of female personnel, the results on the use of such personnel in the operational units are not yet available, as the personnel of the officer and non-commissioned officer categories are still busy developing the expected training/specialist process, the voluntary troop, despite being assigned to the operational departments, is carrying out the final phase of training.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it Furthermore, based on the explicit provision of the law, during the year 2000 the first competitions open to female personnel were announced regarding: • recruitment in the three FA Academies (also for the Carabinieri) and in the Corps Academy It is believed, however, that we are not faced with a "decrease in vocation", but rather with a consolidation of applications after a natural boom in participation at the start of recruitment, long awaited by the female component of society, and at the cessation of the novelty effect. Furthermore, it can be stated, even if not all the selections for the current year have been completed, that this year too the results are satisfactory.
During the year 2000, the members of the Committee provided a valid contribution of thought, also based on the direct experience of the newly incorporated female personnel, contacted during visits to the structures that first hosted them (Academies and Training Regiment Volunteers).
In this regard, it should be noted that the overall number of applications from women has remained almost stable, except for the competitions for Officers where there was a significant decline.
WOMEN RECRUITMENT YEAR 2000
WOMEN RECRUITMENT YEAR 2001 116


The military chaplain is a Catholic priest suitable to carry out this service, appointed by Decree of the President of the Republic upon designation of the Military Ordinary and proposal of the Minister of Defense (art. 16, 17, 18 law 512, 1 June '61; art. 78, 80 First Synod of the Military Ordinariate Church). The service of the military chaplain cannot ignore complete integration with the realities of the Armed Forces. In fact, it is practiced "among" soldiers called to an increasingly advanced and complex professionalism and destined to act in national and intemational contexts. The Chaplain follows his soldiers, adapts to their conditions, participates in their missions. Its presence indicates the possibility of faithfully living the deepest ideals of the human person: honesty, coherence, discipline, fortitude, altruism, ability to serve, which are just some of the characteristics that accompany the life and professionalism of men and women in arms.
With the law on conscientious objection (L. n.230/98), the regulation of conscientious objection was radically modified.
The most significant innovations were: the recognition of conscientious objection as a "subjective right" of the citizen and the transfer of management to the National Office for the Civil Service (UNSC), within the Presidency of the Council of Ministers. Moreover, the time limit 1997-1999; the celebration of the Military Jubilee on 20 November 2000, to indicate the attention that the Church pays to the military world.
2000.
• the publication of the Apostolic Constitution "Spiritualis Militum Curae" of 21 April 1986; • the preparation and celebration of the First Synod of the Military Ordinariate Church in Italy over the years In the same ecclesial context, facts and documents have made it possible to delve deeper into the meaning and value
of this service. Just quote:
5.2.10 Conscientious objection Conscientious objection, bom as a refusal of military service and has now become a citizen's right, has had clear repercussions on the military organization given the identical target group, the equality of the civil service for the purposes of fulfillment of the military obligations and the conditions connected with the different conditions of performance of the two services (essentially, in the absence of solid moral and religious convictions, the less onerous service is chosen by the personnel subject to the military service, other conditions being equal ). This caused an exponential expansion of the phenomenon of conscientious objection from an entity of a few thousand individuals in the early '80s and to a few tens of thousands in the early '90s (effects due to jurisprudential interventions that led to equalization of the duration of civil service to that of military service), to the over 70,000 applications in 1998, to the approximately 108,000 applications in 1999 and to the 62,524 of the year Spiritual Assistance in the Italian Armed Forces is entrusted to approximately 200 Catholic Chaplains under the guidance of the Military Ordinary Archbishop. In recent years, the service has undergone various transformations to adequately cope with the new needs arising from changes in the Armed Forces. • Attention to the training of Chaplains has recently resulted in the establishment of a School for Chaplain Students, located in the Military City of Cecchignola. In the current year, twenty-five young people have begun their studies to become military chaplains under the guidance of a team of priests who take care of their training from both a human, spiritual and physical point of view. A fundamental step in the preparation of the future Chaplain is represented by the acquisition of knowledge relating to the structure of the organization of the Armed Forces from both a theoretical and practical point of view. This objective is also achieved through visits that aspiring Chaplains carry out at military facilities such as barracks, bases and naval units. ____________ The intemational events of recent years have required the use of soldiers, and consequently chaplains, for peace-keeping missions. This presence proved to be particularly useful and indispensable for both the military and the local population. A man of communion, the Chaplain actively contributes to maintaining a serene and supportive climate among the military: he shares hardships, celebrates anniversaries, animates moments of brotherhood and communion, coordinates solidarity actions for those most in need. As pastor of a community, he leads it on a path of purification and renewed impetus in faith, as a spiritual guide he knows how to find that word, discreet and eloquent, for every believer who entrusts himself to him, proposing a path of personal progression. In the meeting with the ministers of other religious confessions he expresses the supreme good of peace and the primacy of human dignity which comes before every form of belief and religion.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The Chaplain's attention is not only for the soldier but also for his family. He follows her from her birth with marriage training courses and accompanies her throughout her subsequent development. The family problems linked to the functionality of the military's tasks in Italy and in missions abroad are highlighted by the Pastoral Letter that the Military Ordinary published in the current year. In this perspective, a specific Commission has been established with a specific pastoral office for the family.
For believers, more specifically, it becomes an eloquent sign and authoritative help to live Christianity coherently even in the world of the barracks.
117


which they serve, the hours of service and free time.
• for the Army a decrease of 1,870 Officers, 2,354 Marshals, 13,666 Conscripts and 676 VFB and an increase of 174 Sergeants and 9,175 Special Volunteers.
• in the transitional period (until the suspension of compulsory military service), conscientious objectors and citizens eligible for military service who opt for such service are subject to the obligation to perform civil service, provided that they are not necessary to meet the needs of the Armed Forces. Furthermore, Italian citizens who request it and have reached and not exceeded 26 years of age, and citizens reformed due to inability for military service or on temporary unlimited leave are also eligible to provide this service on a voluntary basis. , if they have not exceeded the age of 26; • in the period in force (after the suspension of compulsory military service), the matter will be regulated with specific legislative decrees, aimed at identifying the subjects admitted to voluntarily perform civil service, defining the methods of access to the service and the duration of the itself and the related legal and economic treatments. The inspiring criteria of the aforementioned decrees are in summary: the admission of men and women to the civil service, on a completely equal basis; l determination of the economic and legal treatment of volunteers in civil service, taking into account the treatment reserved for VFA (Volunteers on Annual Leave) and within the limits of the financial availability of the National Fund for the civil service; the similar condition between civil and military service, in relation to vocational choice, in the area Among the main innovations introduced, it is expected that:
For 2002 the balanced force forecasts:
Subsequently, the legislator intervened (L. n.64/2001) to establish the national civil service, the management of which was entrusted to the UNSC itself pending the establishment of the Civil Service Agency, providing for admission to the service civil service of men and women, on an equal basis, whose economic treatment is related to that reserved for Volunteers on Annual Leave (VFA) and within the limits of the financial availability of the National Fund for the civil service. scheduled for this transition was extended to 31 December 2001, due to the difficulties encountered by the UNSC in implementing the management of the entire sector of conscientious objectors.
The balanced force in 2001 - excluding the Carabinieri - is shown in the following mirror: ____________ speed of growth of conscientious objection requests in the period 1990-2000 (index 1990=100)
5.2.11 The balanced force of 2001 By balanced force we mean a conventional value of the force, considered constant on every day of the reference year, based on the daily forecasts of the personnel on duty.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it Furthermore, it must be noted that the establishment of the professional military service has determined the halving of the applications for conscientious objection, while the applications for the civil service in the year 2001 are not yet known.
Therefore, the provision resulting from the institutionalization of the civil service presents itself as an altemative form to the recruitment of professional military forces, which will have to count on a large pool of aspirants in order to acquire convinced and well-selected attitudinal and physically personnel. At the moment, the number of applications is just sufficient to ensure the minimum annual revenue planned for the recruitment of Short-Term Volunteers (VFB). It is therefore necessary that the aforementioned structures - to avoid harmful competition - can interact for the institutional purposes for which they are intended. Furthermore, when drafting the legislative decrees deriving from the law of 6 March 2001, n.64, we hope for a concrete recognition of the peculiarity/particularity of voluntary military service, compared to civil service without taking anything away from this very valuable form of social commitment.
• for the Navy a decrease of 171 Marshals, 191 VFB and 1,452 conscripted Sailors compared to an increase of 20 Officers on extended service, 400 Sergeants on special duty, 874 Volunteers on special duty. • for the Air Force, a decrease of 409 Officers, 416 Warrant Officers, 175 VFB, 81 Academy and School Students, 2,986 enlisted Airmen compared to an increase of 755 Sergeants on special training and 603 Volunteers on special training.
118
TABLE FOLLOWS


5.3 Career process (selection, evaluation and criteria) In particular, in harmony with the law of reorganization of the "Military Summits", the Chief of SMD - who has been given the rank of General or Admiral - assumes the Presidency of the "Summit Commission", established in each Armed Force for the evaluation of the division generals. This Commission coincides with the superior advancement commission of each Armed Force and the respective Head of SM assumes the Vice-Presidency.
The composition of the Ordinary Commission and the Superior Commission was also changed
The 2021 time limit, as will be seen later, is linked to the redundancy of Officers and Marshals who, moreover, must not be penalized by the forced reduction of the structure.
The changed organizational situation of the Armed Forces has also made it necessary to update the rules on the composition of the Advancement Commissions, and also introduce specific control procedures dictated by the most recent jurisprudential guidelines expressed on the subject.
Therefore, if the real influx of volunteers corresponds to the forecast, which from below creates the push to create the hard core of the professionals represented by the volunteers in spe, a positive "trend" towards the professionalization of the Armed Forces can reasonably be seen with the limit of 2004 for the Troop and 2021 for the Officers and NonCommissioned Officers, always keeping the total figure of 190,000 men fixed, as shown in the following mirror. each role.
The comparison shows the reduction of the conscript contingent of 18,104 units and the increase of 1,329 Sergeants in spe and 10,652 Volunteers in spe.
For the above-mentioned homologous roles (operational, intermediate, logistical and technical) similar career profiles have consequently been envisaged, i.e. identical progression rates, without prejudice to the fact that the career profiles of non-homologous roles generally differ to a lesser extent than the situation pre-existing. This made it possible to remedy previous anomalous conditions, whereby the careers of Officers with the same function differed significantly depending on the Armed Force they belonged to. On the other hand, this inter-force homogenisation, while mediating positions, has also led to significant career slowdowns, in particular for access to management. This also taking into account that, as a consequence of the reorganization of the social security system for military personnel, carried out with legislative decree 30 April 1997, n. 165 - which raised the age for leaving service - it was necessary to appropriately extend the stays in certain grades of ____________ In the new system, in particular, minimum periods of time are pre-established in each grade in order to access the advancement rates, thus allowing the Administration to better plan the employment of Officers and at the same time give adequate certainties to those involved in terms of career expectations. In essence, the so-called normalized advancement system (i.e. with a fixed number of annual promotions) has been strengthened, simultaneously reiterating for the management the use of "forced redundancies" in order not to exceed the maximum number of personnel foreseen for each grade: Expectation for Reduction of Frameworks (ARQ).
This also taking into account that in the Armed Forces, career progression cannot be linked to a mere "natural" vacancy in the staff of the higher grade, but must include a pre-established number of annual promotions, deriving from a precise combination of training periods, command, employment situations, tenure in grades as well as planned recruitment.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it With the same provision, the progression dynamics was significantly modified, previously based on evaluation rates defined as a percentage of the number of people in the role to avoid, as in the past, irregular hiring or exodus of staff from causing accelerations or slowdowns in careers.
5.3.1 Officers Legislative Decree 490/97 and subsequent amendments carried out the reorganization of the roles of Officers in a reductive key (approximately 8000 fewer units), grouping them into four types (operational, intermediate, technical and logistical), each of whom are divided into a normal role (coming from the Academies or recruited from young graduates in possession of specific professional skills, such as doctors, psychologists, engineers, etc.) and a special role (coming from the roles of Non-Commissioned Officers or Complementary Officers) .
TABLE FOLLOWS 119


Thus, in fact, an administrative career was created which compensates for the slowdown in the hierarchical career. This process was then perfected with subsequent legislative interventions, which led to the payment of salary homogenization regardless of the rank held (albeit with certain temperaments linked to the service status), respectively to the maturation of 13/23 years of service from the appointment as officer or from obtaining the qualification of aspirant.
Advancements in the role are all "seniority-based" with the exception of the granting of the rank of 1st Marshal and the qualification of Lieutenant which occur with the "choice" method.
To compensate at least in part for the slowdown of certain career profiles and to safeguard the economic aspects, rules have also been envisaged which, similarly to the Police Forces, allow the attribution of the economic treatment of the Colonel and the General upon promotion respectively to Major/Lieutenant Colonel, provided they have 15/25 years of seniority from the rank of Lieutenant.
The Minister of Defence, in the presence of canceled progress assessments, may convene the Commission to ensure the regularity of the activities and assessments of the Advancement Commissions as well as the coherence, when renewing the assessment, of the activities and assessments of the Commissions of progress with respect to the decisions to accept the appeals. after 7 years of permanence in each grade, according to the following scheme:
Advancement to the rank of Ordinary Marshal is expected - based on seniority - after two years of tenure in the rank of Marshal. The rank of Chief Marshal can be achieved, always based on seniority, no earlier than seven years of permanence in the lower rank, of which at least three in command activities or, altematively, at least four in specific roles.
Furthermore, in compliance with the delegation, a Control Commission (5 members, of which one official, appointed by Ministerial Decree) was established for the work of the Progress Commissions, competent to verify the procedures of progress assessments canceled ex officio or following the acceptance of a judicial appeal or an extraordinary appeal to the President of the Republic.
5.3.2 NonCommissioned Officers The decree with which the roles of Non-Commissioned Officers were reorganized (Legislative Decree no. 196/95 and subsequent amendments) also defined the advancement rules for each role. In particular, the role of Sergeants has been structured on three hierarchical grades and presents a career progression system: • by seniority, for advancement from Sergeant to Sergeant Major; • optionally, for promotion from Sergeant Major to Sergeant Major Chief; ** of Advancement both in relation to the new organizational structure of the Armed Forces and for functional and employment reasons.
To confirm the great importance attributed to the need to qualify one's managers for useful employment in a joint, national and intemational context, the methods of selection and admission to the ISSMI courses have also been revisited. rank of Chief Marshal; optionally, after eight years of permanence in the same grade. ____________ At the same time, in line with the provisions of Legislative Decree 298/2000, the Army has activated its own Advancement Commissions for the evaluation of Officers.
To reconcile the needs of harmonious development of roles and careers, the possibility of "one-off" transition from the Normal Role to the Special Role has also been envisaged. * Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it annual promotions for each rank, to harmonize them with the other FF.AA.. optionally, after eight years of staying in the grade and optionally, for exams, after four years of staying in the For the Carabinieri, with the reorganization of the roles - redefined into Normal Role, Special Role and Technical-Logistic Role - steps were taken to review the staffing levels, including the managerial levels, the periods of stay in the grades, the advancement methods, as well as the valuation rates and the number of
AND NOT MANAGEMENT OF THE ARMED FORCES
ARMED FORCES
ADVANCEMENT OF NON-MANAGEMENT STAFF 120


After 15 years of seniority in the rank, First Marshals can be awarded the title of "Lieutenant". These personnel, who will have a pre-eminent rank over their peers, will be assigned roles of greater responsibility, among those envisaged for the top level of the role to which they belong. · "choice based on qualifications" (starting from 2009), after having completed 8 years from the assignment of the step additional salary expected for the Adjutant Marshals s.UPS; •
• competition based on qualifications and exams, for Chief Marshals with less than eight years of tenure in the rank. ** VFAs can achieve, after attending a specific course and upon passing it, advancement to the rank of corporal no earlier than the third month after incorporation.
Corporals of the same category, after at least six months of service providing guarantees of safety and reliability, can also be assigned the functional qualification of chosen corporal by the Corps Commander. choice, for Chief Warrant Officers after eight years of tenure in the rank;
* The number of promotions is set annually by the MD up to 1/30 of the staff of the Inspectors Role, with the maximum limit of the number of vacancies existing in the rank of Adjutant Marshal on 31 December of each year;
Volunteers on annual leave (VFA) The rank of 1st Marshal (top rank of the Marshals Role) is reached by 30% of the organic volume of the role. The modes are:
AND NOT MANAGEMENT OF THE CARABINIERI also the responsibility for the selection of volunteer personnel and this has involved, as regards the procedures for the recruitment of volunteers, the implementation of a series of changes and initiatives aimed at selecting personnel suitable to operate within the individual FF.AA .. Above all, new selection criteria were set, in adherence to a concept that went beyond the simple principle of choice/exclusion and was projected towards a vision of the man-soldier, not only as a current, present, but also potential, future resource , in which it is possible to invest in terms of training and education and consequently of employment, as the volunteer staff is, in any case, destined to remain in service for a prolonged period of time.
Consequently, the responsibilities for the selection of personnel, including voluntary ones, have passed from the General Directorate of the Conscription to the Armed Forces General Staff, who carry them out through the Armed Forces Inspectorates and the various selection centers under their control or the selection centers of the military forces. Police, civil and military, or other Administrations, in which the soldier can be admitted. ____________ Carabinieri
ADVANCEMENT OF NON-MANAGEMENT STAFF The Implementation Regulation of the top management reform law has attributed to the Heads of SM of FA, among others, Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it From the Marshals Role it is possible to access the Special Officers Role.
5.3.3 Troop As regards the selection of troop personnel, it was deemed appropriate to focus attention on the selection of volunteer personnel, given the imminent suspension of compulsory military service and the consequent centrality of the figure of the volunteer in the model professional military instrument designed by law no. 331/2000 and subsequent decrees.
VFBs can achieve, subject only to a suitability assessment, the degrees of:
The awarding of this qualification takes place, for the personnel of the FF.AA., following an evaluation procedure according to the relevant merit rankings. · with seniority (in the transitional phase 2002-2008), after having completed a minimum stay in the grade of 7 years for 2002 and 7 years and 6 months for the following years and who have obtained the qualification of "excellent" in the last three years " or equivalent judgment and who have not received a more serious sanction than a reprimand in the last two years.
Short-stop volunteers (VFB) 121
VOLUNTEERS ON ANNUAL STAY


Volunteers on permanent duty (VSP) The phenomenon of resignations, after a peak phase which occurred in 1999
EI - RESIGNATION Advancement of VFBs Furthermore, it is remembered that the rank obtained (corporal or corporal major) constitutes a qualification of merit in competitions for passage into permanent service.
5.3.4 Resignations (excluding Carabinieri) However, failure to pass the "corporal" or "corporal major" course does not, in itself, constitute grounds for dismissal from the VFB. In fact, there is the possibility of repeating the aforementioned courses, only once, and subject to the favorable opinion of the company commander and the battalion commander; and this not before the 9th month (Corporal Course) or the 23rd (Corporal Major Course). The VFBs still judged "unsuitable" will continue to serve in the short term as volunteers (if judged "unsuitable" for the corporal course) or corporal (if judged "unsuitable" for the corporal major course).
This constitutes a further step towards the materialization of that "communicating" system that allows anyone to become part of the FF.AA. and to whatever category they belong to aspire to improve their "status" position and to rise to the highest ranks.
• corporal, not before the third month of incorporation; • corporal major, not before the eighteenth month of incorporation.
Finally, it is highlighted that with the legislative decree (Legislative Decree no. 215/2001) descending from the law establishing the professional military service (L. no. 331/2000), the rules relating to the advancement of volunteers in permanent service have been extended, insofar as they are applicable, also to volunteers on short or fixed terms or on permanent contracts, essentially unifying the discipline of the career path of volunteer staff.
5.4 Economic treatment The remuneration of military personnel is made up of the components: fundamental, accessory and possible: • Fundamental component o Salary: remunerates the work performance connected with the employment relationship with the State. ____________ • which reached critical levels, above all because it referred to subordinates in the Army, it resumed the average trend of the approximately 300 exits from service that had occurred previously. Of note, for the Navy, is the number of resigning officers which stands at an annual average of 200 units, equal to 5% of the overall force (4,000 officers).
For the Air Force the peak occurred in 1997, with a hint, however, of a rise 4 years later, namely in 2001, when as many as 260 Officers requested termination of service and it is known that the attempt was also made through a legislative provision to reduce the phenomenon of pilot exodus.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it 1st Corporal Major (entry level); • Select Corporal Major; • Chief Corporal Major; • Chief Corporal Major.
AM RESIGNATION In the role of Volunteers in Permanent Service, the following degrees can be achieved, based on seniority (every five years of service) and subject only to a judgment of suitability:
MM RESIGNATION 122
ROLE OF VOLUNTEERS IN PERMANENT SERVICE


type of operational activity carried out.
The management staff has a salary linked to the grade and outside the levels. total. night.
Finally, for the military management, any changes to the regulatory framework and the establishment of new salary items (as well as economic adjustments other than the automatic annual ones) can only be pursued through legislation.
In this context we find:
Currently, its value is on average around 1,100,000 lire per month. o Additional pensionable emolument: diversified in relation to the salary level and The supplementary allowances are attributed in addition to the fundamental ones in relation to the actual performance of specific activities or particular conditions of operational employment (travel allowance, off-site travel allowance, emergency air response, etc.).
5.4.1 Periodic adjustment of remuneration The economic contents of the employment relationship of military personnel, initially modifiable only by legislation for all personnel, are now adjusted in a diversified way depending on whether they are managerial or non-managerial personnel. powered by contractual resources of a fixed and continuous nature.
The additional allowances include the command allowance, attributed to the staff who perform For non-managerial personnel (up to the rank of Lieutenant Colonel), and within a framework of homogeneity between the Amate Forces and the Police Forces, delegated "contractual" procedures are envisaged to be carried out at the Civil Service department and with the participation of the Staff Representative Bodies. ____________ Basic allowances are paid in relation to rank, length of service and
• Possible component inconveniences and responsibilities associated with the particular activities carried out in the different employment situations.
The senior military personnel (Colonels and Generals), as well as the managers of the Police Force, are not contractualized.
Future developments The need to ensure adequate recognition of the specifics of the military's status, which recognizes the quantity and quality of the work carried out and is able to compensate for the inconveniences, is strongly felt.
In particular, non-managerial personnel (up to the rank of lieutenant colonel) are classified in the various "salary levels" in relation to their rank, like other public employees. Furthermore, he is the recipient of the Individual Seniority Pay (RIA) linked to his length of service. • o Family allowance: attributed to staff based on family burden and income o Emoluments for transfers and missions: attributed to compensate for the inconveniences endured in transfers of headquarters and to reimburse expenses incurred during isolated services provided outside the ordinary place of employment. o Special supplementary allowance: intended to adjust the level of salaries to changes in the cost of living (inflation). Since November 1991 this allowance has no longer been increased.
In practice, these allowances are linked to the status or professionalism of the staff and cannot be cumulated (campaign, embarkation, air navigation, airspace control).
Ancillary component l Operational employment allowance: specific allowance for FA personnel which compensates for the risks, leadership positions at various levels involving high responsibilities.
These procedures lead to the implementation by decree of the President of the Republic of the contents of the "concertation" procedures, which refer every four years to regulatory aspects (service hours, licences, leave of absence, treatment of mission and transfer, etc.) and every two years to the economic ones (salaries, allowances).
The remuneration is adjusted annually in percentage terms to the average contractual improvements of the public sector in the previous year.
Operational allowances are divided into: fundamental and supplementary. o Overtime: compensates for service performances exceeding normal weekly working hours. Hourly compensation is linked to salary and therefore grade. Within each grade it varies depending on whether the excess service was carried out during the daytime weekday period, nighttime weekday period, daytime holiday service or holiday service Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it 123


The retirement pension is regulated both by the Presidential Decree of 29.12.1973, n. 1092, which contains the general reference legislation, and by law 8.8.1995, n. 335, (Dini reform) which introduced the following innovations with a view to harmonizing treatments between the public and private sectors. In particular, the major changes concemed: • retirement age: set at 65 years for men and
60 years for women; • contributory seniority: 20 years of contributory service (19 years 11 months and 16 days) to be entitled to the old age pension; elimination of the so-called "baby pensions" and placement on demand pension (seniority pension) in the presence of certain age and contribution requirements; • pension calculation: for personnel in service on 1 January 1993 with a contributory seniority of -
In detail, the changes concem:
Military pension reform.
• Auxiliary Allowance: the amount of the difference between the pension and the service salary progressively reduced from 80% to 70%; • “Early redundancy rules”: abolished from 1 January 2002. The retirement upon request of Officers who are less than 4 years from the age limit and of Lieutenant Colonels with at least 30 years of service or 7 years of rank it is possible until 31.12.2001;
Furthermore, the upcoming suspension of compulsory military service will certainly imply the activation of economic tools, suitable for guaranteeing a sufficient flow of volunteers, which will concem both incentives for recruitment and further opportunities on the job market.
31.12.1992; sorting; - termination of service or the last ten years starting from 2003.
• Conventional increases: notional contribution (overestimation of 1/5 of the operational service) ____________
• Reversibility: treatment of the deceased paid to the surviving spouse, or possibly to the children For staff with less than 15 years of service, the pension will be calculated partly according to the salary system and partly according to the contributory system (mixed system).
The pension can be considered a deferred remuneration paid to the employee (or his survivors) upon cessation of employment.
• Auxiliary: transit permitted exclusively to personnel who have left service after reaching the limits
• Institute of "six salary steps": institution subject to a social security withholding tax increased by 0.40% of the salary for staff in service and applied in addition to the A and B quotas of the delegation granted to the Govemment to reintroduce salary parameters linked to the grade/qualification held instead of salary levels for non-managerial personnel in the Security Sector, also with the aim of concretely diversifying the military salary structure from that of the public sector; or parents.
Legislative decree 04.30.1997, n. 165, implementing the delegation granted by the "1997 Finance Law" (L. 662/1996) has introduced since 1998 some provisions aimed at harmonizing the pension treatment of military personnel with that of the public and private sector, taking into account the particular military status.
• Age limit: progressively raised to 60 years of age if lower according to the previous one at least 15 years, the pension is calculated on the basis of two quotas (salary system): • Quota A: based on the last salary received in service for the years useful to the date of the allowance in lieu of overtime for staff in particular employment positions (so-called "operational window"), which will allow operational and training activities to be carried out on the national territory beyond normal working hours without burdensome administrative and bureaucratic obligations.
5.4.2 Retirement treatment.
• Quota B: with reference to the average wages received from 1 January 1993 up to the date limited to 5 years; age and tenure progressively reduced from 8 to 5 years;
Generally speaking, the pension takes the name of: • Old age: treatment attributed to the employee who leaves service due to having reached the age limit or having accrued the maximum contributory seniority (40 years of contributions); • Seniority: treatment attributed to the employee who leaves service early due to resignation; • Disability (Privileged): pension treatment related to the percentage of infirmities or permanent impairments recognized as being due to service or a 10% increase on the ordinary pension;
For newly hired staff, the pension will be calculated taking into account the overall amount of contributions paid throughout their working life (contributory system).
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it 124


There are some significant differences between the compensation paid by INPDAP to the public In this context, the legislative decree of 21 April 1993, n. 124, provides that the establishment of Pension Funds (supplementary pension) is implemented with a specific agreement between the employer (For public employees the Agency for the Negotiating Representation of Public Administrations - ARAN) and the trade union representatives.
Instrumental to the launch of pension funds is the transition from INPDAP severance pay to severance pay (TFR), with a view to the progressive harmonization of the public "system" with the private one. and, for military personnel, also by 6 salary increments.
The remuneration consists of the last salary, the special supplement, the thirteenth month's salary
Since 1992, in fact, the Italian social security system has been progressively aligning itself with that of other European countries based on the classic three pillars: basic public social security (mandatory and "managed" by the State), collective supplementary social security (defined through the employment contracts or concertation), a "private" pension plan (optional and linked to the possibility of individual savings).
With regard to economic treatment, with the "1996 financial law" (article 1, paragraph 63, of law 28 December 1995, n. 549) some general principles were established for military interventions abroad.
In particular, it has been established that personnel belonging to "contingents" are paid the daily allowance for missions abroad, foreseen for the country of destination, at a reduced percentage. TO
• INPDAP (formerly ENPAS) severance pay: the National Insurance Institute for Public Administration Employees (INPDAP), established following the suppression of ENPAS, INADEL and ENPDEP, corresponds to all public personnel (including military personnel), with at least one year of membership in the Fund, the severance pay, referred to in the Presidential Decree of 29 December 1973, n. 1032, adjusted to the last monthly salary received for the years of contribution.
5.4.3 Future developments The reform of the public pension system goes hand in hand with the launch of supplementary social security and pension funds.
With the provision authorizing the mission, and with any subsequent extension decrees, the time limit of the operation and the numerical size of the military contingent employed are established from time to time and the legal and economic regime of the personnel is defined, making reference to other regulatory provisions regarding the legal, insurance and social security profile. pension. The increase is automatically attributed to personnel who leave service due to age limits, upon payment of the notified contributions for those who leave upon request.
FA Officers and Non-Commissioned Officers in permanent service are automatically registered with the "Military Funds" and are subject to the payment of social security contributions equal to 2% of 80% of their salary.
For Army Officers the percentage measure is raised to 3% to cover the provision of an additional allowance - of variable size in relation to the years of membership in the Association and the amount of the last salary received in service - in favor of staff who have left service with the right to a pension.
Finally, it is hoped that concrete recognition of the military status with respect to the dynamics of the public and private sector will also be achieved in social security treatment.
5.4.4 Treatment of military personnel engaged in peacekeeping and humanitarian operations The participation of Italian military units in intemational peacekeeping and humanitarian missions outside the national territory is formally authorized by decree law, aimed at following up on commitments undertaken at an intemational level, to regulate the methods of carrying out the missions and to determine the financial coverage of the related costs. ____________ Military Chests (Officers and Non-Commissioned Officers) every year as established by article 2120 of the Civil Code.
It is hoped that the work on the social security consultation for the launch of pension funds and severance pay (TFR), suspended in 1999, will be restarted as soon as possible and that in this context the issue relating to the Official Funds will be resolved.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The TFR is a provision made up of an annual portion of the entire gross salary to be revalued This will allow military personnel to guarantee themselves, upon retirement, a lifetime annuity capable of almost entirely covering the reduction in income resulting from the cessation of work. employees and severance pay (TFR), a similar institution in the "private" sector.
For the personnel of the FF.AA., the law of 23 December 1998, n. 448, (“Finanziaria 1999”) and the Presidential Decree of 3 August 1999, n. 255, have postponed the regulation of pension funds and INPDAP/TFR severance pay to a specific negotiation (concertation).
125


5.4.5 The difference in the economic treatment of the Italian armed forces compared to the NATO Allies The operations that the Armed Forces are increasingly called upon to carry out in the intemational context, in addition to requiring an increasingly higher level of efficiency and professionalism, have as consequently the natural comparison with other comparable European components also on remuneration aspects. "medium - long" period of time.
As regards the institutional aspect, service accommodation is classified as follows: in force of the euro.
The need to define a uniform regulatory framework for the regulation of profiles relating to the legal, insurance, remuneration and social security treatment of the personnel involved in each mission appears particularly significant, avoiding the multiple linked regulatory references which do not contribute to the readability of the texts. Furthermore, the need to overcome the adjustment to the dollar in the future, given the next revenue, is evident
• contribute to facilitating the interested party in acquiring ownership of an accommodation, even in a Furthermore, as regards the financing of operations, the use of the "unforeseen expenses fund" included in the Treasury Ministry's estimate is envisaged. family needs; starting from 1 January 2000, this percentage was identified as 90% of the entire treatment by the law decrees which authorize the specific interventions.
5.5 The problem of accommodation The "accommodation" problem relating to military personnel is fundamentally characterized by two aspects: an institutional one, linked to the needs of "operational functionality" of the Bodies and Commands, with a direct "reflection" on the subject of "policy of employment", and a social one, connected with the well-being of personnel, understood in the broadest sense of the quality of life of soldiers and their families. In this context, therefore, it is incontrovertible that the solution to the "accommodation problem" constitutes a primary interest of the Defense Administration with a view to being able to: • encourage the acceptance of mobility, without demotivating personnel; • guarantee, in the place of employment, the availability - certain and immediate - of adequate accom
* existing housing units in the Military State Property barracks, used by the Carabinieri. ____________ The following table shows the differences compared to some NATO countries. Differences which, despite the different purchasing power of individual currencies and the different cost of living in the respective countries, are still very significant (net monthly salaries).
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it service of society, consistent with the quality, professional commitment, constraints, restrictions that military life implies, we therefore add that of starting a path of convergence of European systems, also in the diversity of national armies, which brings the soldier European to a salary that is generally homogeneous due to his different nationality.
The current Defense housing stock amounts to 18,945 housing units. This resource allows us to satisfy approximately one in five of the potential applicants. Therefore the "expectation of accommodation" is necessarily destined, in the short term, to be further "aggravated" if we consider that the acquisition, by the Armed Forces, of a markedly and irreversibly "professional" connotation will probably lead to the doubling of the number of potential beneficiaries.
The need to ensure that military personnel have conditions suited to the role and function they perform
CLASSIFICATION OF SERVICE ACCOMMODATIONS 126
TABLE
AVAILABILITY OF OFFICE SERVICE ACCOMMODATIONS.


This situation is aggravated by the fact that the forced recovery of service accommodation occupied by untitled users is still blocked (4340 housing units). This block derives from one of the conditions posed by the Parliamentary Defense Commissions for the purposes of approving the "Annual management plan for the Defense housing stock" for the year 1997 (DM of 30 December 1997), accepted by the Minister of Defense protempore. Recovery occurs only for the most striking individual cases (user who owns multiple properties, user placed on leave and employed in another administration, etc.) and exclusively upon specific authorization from the Undersecretary of State for Defense delegated in the matter. welfare, cultural, recreational, educational and social promotion activities, also in favor of the family members of military personnel; • organization of conference rooms and canteens;
• hygienic – sanitary conditions; • accommodation.
As regards access to ownership of a first home, it should be noted that frequent transfers prevent soldiers from obtaining all the facilities provided by the current regulations on subsidized residential construction.
Compared to the original context of reference, the Institute of Military Representation has seen significant developments over time (such as, for example, the active participation of the RM - as a member of the CEO's delegation - in the inter-ministerial consultation to regulate the employment relationship and the treatment of personnel - Legislative Decree 195/95 and 129/2000), which have significantly increased its role.
The need to adapt RM to continuous social stresses and the continuous evolution of the needs and expectations of the military world, increasingly projected towards its complete professionalization, have made a review of the RM model necessary and urgent.
This leads to the need to "continue working" to achieve the final objective of a significant increase in the Defense housing stock, both through a direct and "significant" intervention by the Legislator, in the wake of what happened with the funding of the law of 18 August 1978, n. 497, both - among other things - through the redevelopment of the housing resource through the effective implementation of the alienation tool. The need in question was also the subject of "evaluation" in the context of the Economic/Financial Planning Document (DPEF) for the years 2001-2005 in relation to which the IV Defense Commission, in the session of 12 July 2000, expressed favorable opinion.
It is therefore necessary to promote interventions for the reserve of subsidized mortgages for members of the Armed Forces, including subsidiary measures such as the early payment of severance pay.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it As regards the social aspect, it should be noted that the housing units needed immediately, which cannot be acquired by the CEO's assets in a short time, could and should be found only in terms of access, by Armed Forces personnel, under preferential conditions for the assignment of rental accommodation by public bodies.
Furthermore, given that the management, even in discretionary terms, of the housing resources of the public residential buildings existing in the territory falls within the competences of the Regions, it is believed that any activity concretely aimed at solving the housing problem of the personnel of the FF.AA. cannot ignore serious contact with the Regional Administrations, also in consideration of the increasingly important role that they have recently acquired.
With this in mind, in the previous legislature, a bill was presented, subsequently merged into a single text together with other bills on the subject, which was approved by the Chamber, but not by the
5.6 The Military Representation The Military Representation (RM) was established with the "Principle rules on military discipline" (L. n. 382/78) which, in summary, established the fundamental legislative principles relating to the rights/duties of the citizen military and introduced Representative bodies into the military system for the first time. As a whole, the representation is an institution of the military system, made up of a set of elective collegial bodies, having the task of presenting personnel requests to the competent Military Authorities in the various sectors of interest, identified by the aforementioned establishing law. In particular, the matters it deals with are those conceming the condition, treatment, legal, economic, social security, health, cultural and moral protection of military personnel. Furthermore, the representation bodies also have jurisdiction over the following topics: • retention of jobs during compulsory military service; • entry into the world of work at the end of military service; • benefits for accidents and illnesses contracted in service and/or due to service; ____________ • Another solution could consist of paying staff a monthly allowance to cover the costs relating to the rent of accommodation found on the free market.
127


It is from this perspective that particular attention has been paid to interpersonal relationships, to the integration of the individual with the system, to greater adherence to the tasks and functions for which the soldier is responsible. In particular, the premises have been laid to encourage greater social recognition of the "military professional" that satisfies and motivates him. all natural.
Having said this, it is appropriate to underline that the well-being of staff is guaranteed through the conduct of a "policy" aimed at seeking every possible "benefit" in favor of all employees of the FF.AA., through:
When we talk about quality of life, we are not only referring to tangible and directly measurable aspects such as housing, sports facilities, recreational facilities, services provided, economic treatment, but also and above all to indeterminate and quantitatively non-measurable factors. which pertain to the personal sphere of the soldier.
5.7 Staff well-being The improvement of the "quality of life", today more than in the past, has become one of the priority objectives of the Defense.
• offer leisure opportunities and common meeting places, in the knowledge that the military presence is of It will be the priority task of this Govemment to take up the issue again and submit it to Parliament for examination. in the territory;
Senate. This consolidated text, which dictates "New rules on Military Representation", aims to provide military personnel with a more efficient and transparent representative instrument, as well as to place each of its components in the best conditions to carry out the duties of the RM, for the protection of the interests of the military community.
This will contribute to: • improving the military's integration and sense of belonging to the surrounding area; • eliminate the trauma of the transition from "civilian" to "military" life; • attract young people towards the "military universe" by integrating them with the existing Administration structures
• contributions towards partial reimbursement of expenses incurred for nursery school fees for employees' children; • health care (thermal bathing, mineral water, inhalation treatments, fair compensation, etc); • incentives for cultural elevation; • use of seaside and mountain stays located on the national territory; • exchanges of stays and "youth camps" with the countries adhering to the Liaison Committee of the Military Social Bodies competent for families and youth (CLIMS); • stipulation of agreements in various sectors such as, for example, the insurance sector relating to civil liability towards third parties, legal protection, financial liability, as well as health matters. Some "products" of various services offered by businesses and companies operating in the interbanking, commercial and hotel sectors are being studied and developed. ____________ A project is being studied by the SME which includes a series of spaces (satellite areas) open to interaction with the territory such as cyber cafes, intemet points, gyms, shopping centres, meeting places for recreational and social activities - cultural.
The concept of an ideal community that offers the possibility of integrating life in the military structure with the social life of the territory is felt to be a fundamental need. or for individual purposes;
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The resulting interventions are aimed at: • taking care of interpersonal relationships and motivation;
• build a community in which social, economic and cultural bonds are recognised; • integrate the individual with the environment. • A key element of the quality of life is represented by the participation of the individual in the structure. The tool to achieve this result is the strengthening of intemal communication channels. In particular, it must be interactive and integrated from a perspective that tends to make the military entity feel an integral part of the structure. activities of a predominantly socio-recreational, cultural, sporting and welfare nature carried out by social protection bodies (DI 521/98, DI 522/98 and Pub. SMD-G-023 ed. 99); • allocation to specific chapters of funds intended for the expense of welfare interventions for collective purposes 128


• assistance and support intervention in the event of illness; • any interventions to support the school education of children, and anything else that may be necessary to contain the difficulties and alleviate the suffering of a family unit that cannot count on the presence of its own guide.
The above facilities can be integrated with accommodation, catering, sports and bathing services.
TABLE
• the possibility of active intervention by the Administration to manage the solution of significant problems; the maintenance of the accommodation or concrete help in finding suitable accommodation; certain reference and in a position to guarantee effective support in case of need and for families to be able to better tolerate the absence of their relative, who, moreover, operational and environmental situations generally impose a limited contact with their family unit. There is therefore a need for specific legislation aimed at allowing Commanders to implement the activities necessary to guarantee, for example:
• with a mixed connotation: these are the Defense Dependent Recreational Clubs (CRDD) whose beneficiary personnel are mainly civilians. They are conceived as logistical support bodies for in-service personnel, if integrated into bodies and departments, or as social protection bodies for in-service and retired personnel in a broader territorial context; • of particular social protection: these are the Marine and Mountain Stays.
The activity of supporting the families of personnel employed in operations, considered necessary not only from a moral point of view, but also from a functional point of view, is however obviously affected by the limitations deriving from rigid regulations which, even in administrative terms, determine limitations that are difficult to overcome . In essence, it is a question of guaranteeing the staff employed "tranquility at work" deriving from the awareness that their family unit remaining in their homeland can have, in all circumstances, a point of service and in retirement;
As regards the need for support interventions for the families of military personnel involved in operations outside the area, one of the objectives has been set to guarantee the indispensable protection of the personnel employed in these delicate activities and, consequently, of the related families, certainly subjected to situations of psychological and material hardship not comparable to those of the majority of citizens.
• logistical support: these are the Conference Rooms integrated into the operational and training Departments, with a typically military connotation, frequented by the personnel on duty in the same Departments; • social protection: these are the clubs, with a territorial connotation, in favor of military personnel in The legislator has envisaged two forms of management: • direct, through the use of budget chapters of the CEO; • concession to organisations/associations among employees, recognized by the Minister, Institutions and Third Parties. ____________ In relation to the specific functions and the nature of the activities carried out, the Social Protection Bodies
(OPS) are classified as follows: ** Entities managed privately by the FAP (Social Security Assistance Fund).
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it As regards activities of a predominantly socio-recreational, cultural, sporting and welfare nature, the objective has been set of organizing social protection structures, making them increasingly comfortable and equipping them with modem mass communication equipment, which is already widely used in equal non-military structures. These resources must then be integrated by the activities that the Bodies, Commands and Departments of the Armed Forces. are called upon to implement to promote psycho-physical recovery during free time. In this context, the maximum autonomy is granted to the peripheral Commands to create agreements with local authorities, so that the employed personnel can benefit, as much as possible, from the services available outside the strictly military context. * • The Navy Clubs are regulated by specific statutes and are comparable to private structures.
129


The Social Services Office of the General Command also manages relations with: • the National Carabinieri Association. the Fund maintains relationships with clinical centers - including foreign ones - where treatments can be provided for particularly serious pathologies affecting soldiers and/or families; or Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it • or (Opera Assistance for Military Orphans of the Carabinieri) which provides support to the widows and orphans of the soldiers of the Carabinieri;
The use of concessions to entities and third parties is increasingly frequent. But this type of condition involves the stipulation of an agreement/negotiating document which does not always arouse interest on the part of organisations/companies. Firstly due to the limited catchment area of some local areas which leads to a limited profit and also due to the repeated action of the Ministry of Finance which deems it necessary for the company to pay a rental fee for the premises which have so far been granted free of charge.
Pension assistance and bonuses for personnel of the Carabinieri or private foundations;
5.8 The Phenomenon of Hazing The Conference Rooms are included within the OPS, which are logistical support bodies conceived as integrated elements in operational and training departments with a typically military connotation and whose recipients are the personnel serving in the departments themselves; have the aim of contributing to improving the functionality and efficiency of the Units, Bodies and Departments, of strengthening "esprit de corps", promoting and nurturing bonds of military solidarity, as well as facilitating the integration of military communities with local ones. or the families of victims of duty and those killed in service, promoting appropriate initiatives to concretely and continuously assist the aforementioned families; ____________ or public and private health facilities are contacted to agree on discounts on rates relating to hospitalizations, diagnostic tests and highly specialized medical services, as well as to be able to avail of other procedural facilities at them; • the ONAOMAC In particular, in the following sector: • social security: o relationships are maintained with insurance companies in order to obtain benefits for staff in signing car civil liability policies and ancillary guarantees, healthcare, pension and life funds; o periodic agreements with banking institutions which allow the application of favorable conditions to staff for taking out loans for the construction or renovation of their first home, maintaining current accounts, etc.; welfare: • we proceed with the purchase of recreational material (televisions, video recorders, etc.) for the conference rooms of the Army commands and with the stipulation of agreements with hospitality and commercial establishments; various recreational activities are organised, including: study holidays abroad for staff children; cultural trips abroad.
The assistance and well-being activity carried out by the Carabinieri deserves a separate discussion, which it ensures, through a series of initiatives headed at a central level by the Social Services Office of the General Command, and at a peripheral level by the Secretariat and Staff Offices of the Commands. of Body. This activity is aimed at soldiers in service and on leave and their families and makes use of budgetary allocations and the Pension Assistance and Bonuses Fund for Carabinieri Personnel - established in 1964 - managed by a Board of Directors chaired by General Commander, endowed with a real estate asset and fueled by the voluntary contributions of the personnel in service. • staff well-being: the granting of subsidies, prizes, contributions and scholarships is envisaged with allocations to specific budget chapters, with charges bome by the Fund However, due to the suspension of the military service and other contingent situations, it is no longer possible to allocate the now highly specialized staff for direct management.
National 130


The common element in all these cases is the desire to abuse and marginalize those who are weaker or considered "different" for the most disparate reasons: what matters is that the pretext exists, no matter what, to unleash the aggression.
By doing so, young people will be offered the certainty of finding a serene environment, purified of archaic phenomena of abuse, and such as to encourage the choice of an interesting professional opportunity.
This is the operation that the Armed Forces are carrying out, responding positively to the requests coming from within their own sphere and from outside, giving rise to actions aimed at improving the overall image of the military world and the level of knowledge of the same that young people normally they draw from summary, and often pre-established, information.
In fact, illustrious scholars have already expressed their opinion on the subject in the past through sociological analyzes on the reasons for the deviant phenomenon, on its nature, on its dangers, on the connections with other forms of juvenile deviance also widespread in the world of school, university, sport, work.
There is, on the part of the political authorities and military leaders, the awareness that the military instrument of the future, based on entirely professional forces with a female component, will certainly be able to benefit from more adequate measures to protect personnel and enlisted personnel. in the first place.
It is not considered useful, here, to dwell on the sociological interpretation of hazing.
In fact, there have been various initiatives in this sense and among them a series of proposals deserves mention aimed both at modifying the aforementioned article 260 of the military penal code of peace and at creating the crime of hazing.
This particular attention, added to that of the leaders of the Armed Forces, forcefully affirmed the clear will of the institutions to address and resolve the problem of violence within military structures.
Much remains, however, to be done to achieve the objective that everyone, military and political authorities, have set for themselves, that is, the quality of life in the military environment, the condition of serenity of young people, attention to their problems, to the inconveniences , to the uncertainties, to the needs during military service.
But the fight against deviant behavior, as previously mentioned, has not only found the Armed Forces deployed.
In 2000, the Defense Commission of the Chamber, the first time for an institutional body of this level, addressed the problem of hazing in an in-depth and systematic manner, arranging a fact-finding investigation into the phenomenon.
This awareness, perhaps unique, was all the more important as it came to be placed in a phase in which the Armed Forces were, as they still are, engaged in a profound work of transformation which will lead them, in a short time, to a more streamlined configuration with strong professional characteristics.
87 conscripts and active duty soldiers were involved in the 54 incidents of hazing. Of these, 73 were reported to the judicial authorities,
12 punished, pursuant to art. 260 of the military penal code of peace, while 2 were punished with disciplinary sanctions, outside the cases provided for by the aforementioned art. 260.
As is known, article 260 allows the Commander, in cases of crimes punishable by a maximum of six months' imprisonment, to proceed in a disciplinary manner following communication to the military judge. ____________ It is no coincidence that in the recent past there have been more numerous initiatives undertaken in this sense by the political and military leaders.
This decisive awareness and position, beyond any other consideration, represents an important step forward in the fight against hazing: an important fight for the reaffirmation and re-establishment of legality, where violated, and to put an end to the serious damage that phenomenon caused, and still causes, to the image and credibility of the Armed Forces, which the military world has progressively built at the cost of heavy sacrifices.
As regards the most recent statistical data on the phenomenon, in the first six months of 2001 a total of fifty-four (54) incidents of hazing were recorded, which involved departments of the Army (51), Navy (2) and Air Force ( 1). Compared to 2000 (95 cases), there is a slight trend decline which, however, does not differ much from the normal trend of recent years.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it In these conditions, the Defense's commitment to counteract intemal violence is not insignificant, a commitment that is renewed month after month with each new entry of recruits.
The Permanent Observatory on Hazing, created with this objective, after three years of activity presents itself more than ever as a reference point.
The Armed Forces, since they are closely connected with civil society - of which they represent a cross-section - are not separated from these degenerations which, on the contrary, in the military youth world, combine and integrate, favored in this by greater promiscuity. This contributes to developing that complex of deviant behaviors that determine hazing: even in 2000, in fact, a close correlation was confirmed between abusive behaviors, schooling and employment in civilian life.
Already in May 1998, the SM of Defense considered it essential to equip itself with a tool for studying "hazing" which could, through the analysis of statistical data and socio-environmental situations, provide a comprehensive and in-depth picture of the phenomenon.
131


____________ Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The aim of the aforementioned bill is to guarantee unconditional respect for the rights of the person, also within the Armed Forces, strengthening criminal protection against behaviors that can be traced back to "hazing".
On a technical-legal level, three distinct objectives are pursued: the introduction of new types of crime ("private violence", "ill-treatment" and "extortion") in the military penal code of peace, the provision of a specific aggravating circumstance in terms of crimes against the person and the introduction of ex officio prosecution for those crimes which represent peculiar manifestations of the phenomenon of hazing.
132


133 In particular, the educational institutions of each FA are responsible for the basic training, qualification and specialization of FA personnel, while the professionalization with marked interoperability of military personnel is devolved to the Joint Force Institutes with a view to capitalizing on resources.
As regards the background, the decree also regulates the recognition of the studies completed by the Officers of the Armed Forces. and the Financial Police, leaving the definition of detailed implementation methods to specific agreements between university and military institutions.
6.1.2 NAVY
6.1 GENERAL INFORMATION - EUROTRAINING
6.1.1 ARMY
6.1.1.1 Officers
6.1.1.2 NonCommissioned
Officers 6.1.1.3 Troop 6.1.1.4 Preparation for operational cycles It identifies the university classes which, by structure and content, define the courses suited to the professional profiles of officers in the fields of mathematical, physical-natural, humanistic, legal, political, economic, historical-geographical and technical-military sciences, in relation to the national and intemational context in which they are called to operate, as well as more general professional profiles, i.e. able to operate in structures of various nature and non-specifically military levels. (Interministerial Decree of 12 April 2001 regarding the classes of Bachelors and Specialist Degrees in Defense and Security Sciences). This decree incorporates the peculiarities of the training of military personnel and defines the "Defense and Security" Area as an area suitable for containing university study courses for officers of the Armed Forces, including the Carabinieri and the Guard Corps. of Finance, as well as the professional figures who operate in the "security" field.
TRAINING The search for this type of training has led to the definition of a training system based on objectives which, inspired by criteria of pragmatism and realism, and continuously subjected to quality control, has guaranteed, at the same time, a "civil" recognition of studies carried out at military institutes. ____________ In this context it was deemed essential to proceed even more vigorously in achieving continuous training aimed at employment. This is with the aim of pursuing the modem objective of abandoning the traditional notional school model and replacing it with a "job oriented" qualification, in order to have staff with concrete know-how skills.
6.1 General - Eurotraining In relation to the evolution of the recruitment system and the tasks of the Armed Forces, military training has undergone a natural process of adaptation aimed at developing a training model aimed at the acquisition of specific skills and abilities.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
6.1.5.1 Managed by the
Army 6.1.5.2 Managed by the Navy
6.1.5 RANGE, TRAINING AREAS AND SIMULATORS.
In summary, the training processes for Normal Role personnel include: • for Officers: Training courses at the Academies lasting 4 or 5 years; Qualification and specialization courses (General Staff Courses) at War Schools or equivalent institutes lasting one academic year; Advanced training courses at the Joint Chiefs of Staff Institute and the Institute for Advanced Defense Studies;
6.1.2.1 Officers
6.1.2.2 NonCommissioned
Officers 6.1.2.3 Troop 6.1.2.4 Training activities 6.1.3
AIR FORCE
6.1.3.1 Officers 6.1.3.2 Non-Commissioned
Officers 6.1.4
CARABINIERI 6.1.4.1
Officers 6.1.4.2 Non-Commissioned Officers 6.1 .4.3 Troop 6.1.4.4 Activities training for departments assigned to military tasks
PART VI


The search for "know-how" therefore becomes the driving force of the higher education planning system, the effectiveness of which can be tangibly measured through the level of professional competence acquired.
It is therefore necessary to seek mediation between specialist training and broad-spectrum preparation aimed at acquiring general skills and increasing analysis, synthesis and ideation skills.
• for graduates and troops: training and specialization courses at FA training institutes and operational units;
Qualification courses, including distance leaming, in the fields of foreign languages and IT.
For the military commander - given the variety of possible fields of use and the extreme indeterminacy of the problems, especially operational, that he may find himself facing - it is necessary to provide training more aimed at the acquisition of problem solving methods with particular attention to the variability of the characterizing parameters.
In the military profession, in fact, it is not always possible to apply managerial concepts and, at times, it is very difficult to align the choices made with cost-benefit criteria, given that, in the operational field, there is a will that is openly conflicting with the achievement of the set objectives. .
English training courses are planned at NATO schools;
Professionalization The common tendency of all modem complex organizations is to train their managers in an increasingly pragmatic and concrete way.
A common factor, for staff with an adequate level of knowledge of the language
• for non-commissioned officers: training courses at academies or equivalent schools lasting 2 or 3 years;
Qualification and specialization courses at Weapon Schools or equivalent institutes; Highly specialized courses at the Joint Schools of Telecommunications, Aerocooperation and Biological and Chemical Nuclear Defence.
In this context, for the acquisition of specific skills/competences or for updating, higher education can be integrated by the attendance of "targeted" courses at the NATO School of Oberammergau, military educational institutions of foreign countries, national universities or Private institutions.
• Specification of FA: is expressed mainly in the attendance of MS courses/Normal Course at the respective War Schools/Higher Institute of Maritime Studies; • Joint and intemational: this is expressed in the attendance - by a number of Officers, selected by the FA to which they belong and designated by the Chief of SMD - of the Higher Institute of Joint Forces Staff (ISSMI) and of the Institute of Advanced Studies for the Defense (IASD). ____________ In particular, it can be considered divided into:
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it Higher education Higher education is part of the general training system, having upstream the "basic training", specific to FA. It represents the set of general cultural and technical-professional preparation activities, carried out within FA and joint forces educational institutions, aimed at providing the Officers of the Armed Forces with. the skills and competences necessary to hold positions of responsibility, at various hierarchical levels, within the General Staff and FA, joint and intemational commands, as well as to be able to carry out medium and high level command positions. Furthermore, higher education pursues the eventual aim of achieving specific professional skills necessary to cover specific technical, managerial or operational roles.
Basic training and qualification/specialization The complexity of the materials and means supplied to the units requires the availability of specialized personnel capable of satisfying the multiple needs of use and efficiency. Each FA, which is responsible for preparing its own forces, therefore identifies the most suitable training courses to allow its personnel - in relatively short instructional times and in any case compatible with the correct education/operational activity relationship - to acquire those "skills" necessary to be used practically and operationally in the main contexts in which the FA finds itself acting. Referring to all military personnel, basic training and qualification/specialization provides for the preparation of the individual fighter, the Commander at lower levels and the specialists.
Defense needs in the joint-force training sector The key defense needs in the joint-force training sector have been identified as: basic training and qualification/specialization, higher training, professionalisation, continuing training, European training.
134


But European training also has a notable impact in the troop sector and the topic is the subject of particular attention by the Ministry of Defense, especially in relation to the preparation and placement of volunteers in the world of work at the end of their service under arms. .
• develop and conduct courses at a strategic and political-military level, aimed at training, in the various fields of interest, officers (and possibly civilian managers) selected to hold relevant positions within the national military organization and in the foreseeable future organization of European defense.
European training Recently, the problems involving the FF.AA. Italian ones develop in a strategic and geographical context outside the area of direct interest of NATO but of pre-eminent European and/or Mediterranean value. The goal of creating an integrated military instrument in the European context must, therefore, be considered of high priority and, consequently, it appears necessary to make every effort to achieve it in a short time. The current political-military reality, the new strategies, the modem applied technologies constitute the parameters with which every military force will have to deal in order to achieve the necessary compatibility of use with the equal structures of other countries.
This interoperability must be sought, as a priority, in the sectors of standardization of doctrines, procedures for use and means/materials but, above all, in the field of military culture, to be built through a training of Military Cadres that is as common as possible, in a European context. at all levels.
The modem concept of "continuous training" of managers attributes to the institution the function of constantly and without interruptions both updating the knowledge/skills of its managers through every possible didactic form (short courses, intemships, handouts, conferences, involvement in training activities, distance leaming, refresher courses by correspondence, traveling professorships, e-mail, etc.), and in the creation of new professional skills that have become necessary following doctrinal or employment developments. This project, currently being defined, will allow the creation of a close link between training institutes and their attendees. “combined” under an aegis also different from that of NATO;
• prospectively contribute to the effective cohesion between the European military units employed in missions Making specific reference to the ISSMI course, a qualified person cannot therefore limit himself to being just a bureaucrat trained to "do" and "apply" standardized procedures, but must also be able, once inserted into an MS, to penetrate its "function ” and the “rules” by adapting them, with intelligence and a sense of responsibility, to the various situations. direct knowledge of the staff; ____________ This institute, aimed at training military leadership, should achieve the objectives of: • pursuing amalgamation between future European military leaders, to be achieved also through
• develop common activities with European and Mediterranean military training institutes, verifying the application of the doctrine and increasing the use of standardized procedures and operational simulation; • make attendance by Italian attendees of courses held abroad equal to those of the same level held in Italy. Verify the possibility of making this concept valid also for basic courses (Academies, Non-Commissioned Officer Cadet Schools, etc.); • provide for the establishment of a higher education institute (on the model of the NATO DEFENSE COLLEGE based in Rome) open to visitors from all European countries and the Mediterranean area.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it These were activities mainly aimed at carrying out literacy training courses in the IT and English language sectors, professional training courses thanks to specific agreements with the
Since 1998, the Defense Administration has implemented a project called "DEFENSE EUROFORMATION", with the aim of raising the cultural and professional level of young people in arms, with particular attention to the less educated groups, issuing them useful training credits for subsequent entry into the job market.
European scope;
• increase, at all levels, bilateral exchanges of attendees between basic training institutions in Eurotraining - Professions The Ministry of Defence, in constant contact with conscripts and volunteers in the short term, constitutes a privileged observatory for the analysis of problems relating to the inclusion of young people in the labor market and for the dissemination of new tools and training strategies.
To this end, various measures aimed at achieving this objective are being studied. In particular:
135 Continuous training


The aim is to quickly make young conscripts and volunteers aware of the possibilities and opportunities that the Regions, through the State, can offer to finance the opening of a business or business association, the so-called honor loan.
- Training on youth entrepreneurship (L. 44/86) and self-employment (L. 236/93).
The training centers were selected in relation to the preponderance of organic flow of personnel divided into: - n. 124 for the Army; - n. 16 for the Navy; - n. 12 for the Air Force.
- Professional skills training, aimed at professional training. This path was implemented in concert with the Administrative Regions and the recipients of the training action are selected based on previous skills.
In this context, at 152 barracks of the Armed Forces - Army, Navy and Air Force - located throughout the national territory, as many training centers have been created equipped with modem multimedia classrooms in which teachers from qualified companies in the sector carry out training activities.
This teaching methodology is particularly effective both for the purposes of leaming the language and for the leamer's interaction with the IT tools used.
With the memorandum of understanding of May 1998 with the Ministry of Labour, the Project was included in the Community Support Framework (CSF) for the 1994-99 cycle, thus becoming eligible for co-financing with the European Social Fund (ESF), a financial instrument to promote Community employment policies.
Regions and to develop youth entrepreneurship by making young people aware of the opportunities that the Regions themselves offer for the financing of new businesses.
For English, training is provided using special self-leaming software developed by the Applied Theoretical Linguistics Interfaculty Center (CILTA) of the University of Bologna.
As of 28 September 2001, after 2 years and 8 months of activity, over 12,639 courses had been held for approximately 174,913 young people. The total cost of the project was 115 billion lire, of which 70 were paid entirely by the ESF used.
This site also includes some pages relating to each training centre, containing general information and tables on data relating to courses and students. These data automatically flow into summary tables of Eurotraining activities. The website consists of over 300 dynamic pages and a database containing information from 152 training centers. ____________ The English language course is also made up of a basic course, an intermediate course and an advanced course, each lasting
50 hours for the military and 112 hours for the volunteer.
The IT course is made up of basic, intermediate and advanced courses, each lasting 24 hours for military personnel and 40 hours for volunteers. To these must be added the European Computer Driving License (ECDL) courses, for obtaining the so-called European computer driving license lasting 72 hours for everyone.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it To optimize the monitoring activity of the project, and to allow any user to access the source of information, since 1 July 1999 the website has been present on the Intemet as a vehicle also for advertising on Eurotraining activities at the address: www .euroformazione.difesa.it computer science and knowledge of the English language.
The programs of the "Eurotraining" circuit were aimed at three areas of intervention: - Mass training, aimed at increasing basic knowledge in the two sectors of literacy For the implementation of mass training - IT and English - over 300 multimedia classrooms were created (amortized with the ESF) which constitute an asset acquired for the Defense, with the following characteristics: - 13 multimedia PCs in LAN; - servers; - laser printer; - satellite station; - 2 video recorders;
- 2 17" TVs.
Starting from 2002, two Carabinieri centers will be added.
INTERNET TABLE 136


With the new "Community Support Framework 2000/2006", a new cycle has begun which provides for the transition from centralized to decentralized management, with the disbursement of community resources no longer to the Ministry of Labor but directly to the Regions. This involves the stipulation of specific memoranda of understanding with each individual education councilor of the Local Authorities.
In this context, the project, by contributing to the implementation of current regulations on youth employment, which are difficult to apply at a national and regional level, constitutes a valid example of what synergies can be achieved in the specific field of active labor policies, finalizing the contribution of community support and the resources and expertise already available within the AD. to the organization of the courses.
• contribution to the Govemment's policies on youth employment; • incentive for voluntary enlistment; • wider and more incisive use of community benefits.
In addition to reaching the target of the community resource, another positive aspect, as a consequence of the value of the Project, is that of creating employment. In fact, with the English, IT and Youth Entrepreneurship courses alone, a job creation of at least 1000 employed teachers and staff has been created technologies;
Course activity carried out from 1 July 1998 to 28 September 2001
• raising the standards of basic knowledge (English and IT) for all conscripts and volunteers, including those destined for a military career, with a consequent "leap in quality" for the Armed Forces. increasingly committed to operating in intemational contexts and in step with modem trends
• two years at the Military Academy of Modena, at the end of which the students obtain the appointment as Second Lieutenant (the training objective is to give students the ability to use the tools of individual combat, command a rifle squad and operate in the scope of a patrol);
The training process for RN Officers, which aims to prepare young Officers from an ethical, cultural and technical perspective, giving them all the references necessary to establish a solid professional base, lasts approximately 5 years and includes in succession of
time the frequency of: ____________ With the development of the initiatives outlined, the Defense Administration aims to achieve the following outcomes:
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
6.1.1 Army 6.1.1.1 Officers The current training process for Officers in permanent service of the Normal Role (various Arms, TRAMAT Arms, Administration and Commissariat Corps, Engineers Corps and Medical Corps) develops through the following phases: • training; • qualification; • specialization; • professionalization.
For the remaining Regions, similar agreements are expected to be reached also in light of the political initiatives taken in the State-Regions Conference held on 19 April 2001.
In the current decentralized management context, the Regions of Sicily, Sardinia, the Autonomous Provinces of Trento and Bolzano and since 2002 Lombardy, Veneto, Tuscany, Piedmont, Lazio, Puglia, Emilia Romagna have signed agreements with the Defense for the provision of teaching, through its own qualified companies, in support of EUROFORMATION programmes.
In particular, article 17, paragraph 3 of the aforementioned Legislative Decree clearly outlines the actions to be implemented regarding professional training and placement of young armed men in the labor market. The SMD has the task of coordinating the activities that must be promoted, within the Technical Operational Area, for the creation of a synergistic device, between the SMD and the FA SMs, to interface with the Employment Office work of the discharged volunteer soldiers of LEVADIFE.
Furthermore, the CEO is already working to ensure that the provisions of the art. are fully implemented. 5 of Law 331/2000 and related legislative descendant (Legislative Decree of 8 May 2001, 215).
Training Goals 137
EUROFORMATION PROJECT


Those who have passed the General Staff Course and the Pluritematic Course obtain the Master's Degree in Strategic Sciences.
The training objective of the SM Course is to prepare attendees for employment as staff officers at the elementary large unit level, while the multi-itematic course is aimed at providing the skills to operate as staff officers within the intermediate commands. and at the top of the Armed Forces. professionals at the Military Academy of Modena.
As can be seen from the context just outlined, the high basic preparation of military personnel and the ever-increasing complexity of the sectors in which they are called upon to operate have led the Armed Forces to The specialization is initially achieved with the General Staff Course lasting approximately 5 months, of a compulsory nature, at the Application School of Turin, at the end of which a portion of the attendees (on a voluntary basis), made up of Officers who have demonstrated possess adequate skills, aptitude and professionalism, are admitted to the Pluritematic Course, lasting approximately 5 months, conducted at the University of Turin and the Application School.
An exception is made to the Officers of the Medical Corps, who complete the entire cycle of university and technical studies - Specialization The specialization phase aims to provide Officers with specific knowledge and basic skills to operate effectively at the Commands of Large National and Intemational Units.
• one year (the fifth) consisting of a Linguistic Improvement Course, a Technical Application Course at the competent Weapons/Specialty Schools and Practical Intemship at the Volunteer Training Regiments.
• two years at the Application School of Turin (the training objective is to give attendees the ability to use the communicative, doctrinal, procedural, methodological, logistical-administrative and technical tools to operate within the Weapon/ Specialty/ Body to which he belongs); • The phase in question begins with attendance of the Joint Forces Higher Staff Course (ISSMI) and continues through the carrying out of other training and/or refresher activities aimed at the specific commitments to be fulfilled.
Professionalization completes the training process of Officers. It is essentially aimed at officers destined to be employed in the General Staff, in intemational commands and, subsequently, in senior management positions. ____________ • activities that have a common value, for the qualification of personnel in proximity to fundamental stages of employment; activities diversified in content and of short duration (courses, seminars and refresher courses), aimed both at keeping the body of knowledge constantly updated and at acquiring further skills connected to the tasks to be carried out.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it Subsequently, as part of the selection in question, the Officers access a Qualification Course at the War School (lasting approximately 2 months), preceded by a "remote" phase.
As regards the ISSMI Course, the interested personnel are selected through a procedure which, among other things, also includes a correspondence language course, at the end of which the attendees are subjected to a diagnostic test to verify their leaming. Those who pass the aforementioned course are admitted to an intensive phase at the Army Foreign Language School.
It develops in the period from the end of the training phase to the General Staff Course (excluded) and is focused on:
Qualification aims to enable Officers to acquire specific knowledge regarding the sector in which they are destined to operate, perfecting their military capabilities with reference to the Weapon/Specialty/Corps they belong to.
After attending the General Staff Course, a portion of Officers may find themselves in a position to access (on a voluntary basis), at the Center for Higher Defense Studies, the Higher Interforce General Staff Course (ISSMI), whose training objective consists in prepare attendees to operate within the Joint Forces Top Commands. Another portion of Officers (the largest) is instead destined for employment in specialized sectors (staff positions, military teachers, instructors, employment in Technical Directorates, etc.), after attending "ad hoc" courses in the territory nationally and abroad.
At the end of the aforementioned training process, the Officers obtain a degree.
Collaborations with universities 138


Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it In the context of these collaborations, the Army does not act as a mere "user", but is an active part of a fruitful system coming from the Military Academy);
Specialization course in Geopolitics, 10 places for the Armed Forces);
2001; Master of Arts in Intemational Relations, 2 places for the Armed Forces); "Electronic Warfare" and "HUMINT"; in Great Britain, Germany and the USA);
• common, carried out at the Application School and lasting 12 weeks, which gives the In this regard, by way of example, among the institutes with which forms of collaboration are in place, the following are worth mentioning: coming from the Non-Commissioned Officers School); interpreters). ,
• the “La Sapienza” University of Rome (Special Course in Merceology and Applied Chemistry for Officers of the Administration and Commissariat Corps, 5 places for the Armed Force; Specialization course in Logistics Management,
30 places for the Force Army);
Training activities abroad deserve special mention for training activities of various types (courses, linguistic intemships, coaching, on-the-job training) carried out by staff, at every stage of their career, at foreign schools/institutions and which contribute to better qualifying / specialize those who are destined to operate in "critical" sectors or in "valuable" assignments for the Armed Forces and/or in multinational contexts.
• the University of Turin (Degree in Strategic Sciences for the Officers of the various Arms, of the Transport and Materials Corps and of the Administration and Commissariat Corps coming from the Military Academy; Master in Strategic Sciences for those attending the SM Course and the Course
• acquisition of expertise in particular "niche" sectors (Psychological Operations, Information Research, COCIM/CIMIC, etc.) and/or on new weapon systems, in order to create "pools" capable of managing the acquisition of individual capabilities and subsequently transfer them to the FA area.
Medical Corps from the Military Academy); ____________ Communication in Teaching, 30 places for the Armed Forces); • designated within the framework of the "Italian Contingency Command - ITALCOM" project;
• training of the staff of the "Simulation Pool" and the "Observers/Controllers" Pool (activities carried out in order to achieve adequate preparation for the responsibilities deriving from the new status of Officer in permanent service.
This course is divided into 3 phases: frequenters sufficient ability to identify and use regulatory, procedural and technical tools establish a dense network of collaborations with the university world, which is constantly expanding, for university and postuniversity level courses, intended for Officers and Marshals.
• the University of Bologna (Degree in Veterinary Medicine for Health Officers
• the University of Cassino (Media Communication Course, 30 places for the Armed Forces;
• the University of Tuscia in Viterbo (Degree in Organizational and Management Sciences for Marshals
• the Free “San Pio V” University of Rome (distance courses in foreign languages and courses for cultural exchange. In fact, the courses to which the agreements in question refer - all open to interested civilian students - are also conducted using military teachers, appointed by the University Institutes on the recommendation of the Armed Forces.
Plurithematic); the Polytechnic of Turin (Degree in Engineering for Officers of the Corps of Engineers coming from the Military Academy);
• the “Roma 3” University (specialization course in Peacekeeping and Security Studies, 25 places for the Armed Forces;
Intemal communication course, 70 places for the Armed Forces;
For 2001, in particular, these activities were mainly aimed at achieving the following objectives: • acquisition of the capabilities required in the framework of the training project for the establishment of a "High Readiness Forces (Land) Headquarters in an Italian framework"; • preparation of personnel to be employed in management bodies in the multinational context, already "Sensors"
Training process for Special Role Officers The winners of the competition, based on the Legislative Decree of 30 December. 1997 n. 490, must attend a specific Application Course,
• the University of Modena and Reggio Emilia (Degrees in Medicine and Pharmacy for Officers of the
• expansion of the technical and professional knowledge of the personnel to be employed in the sectors
• St. John's University – Rome Campus (Master in Business Administration, not activated for
• preparatory (if any), carried out at the Application School and lasting 2 weeks, intended only for attendees coming from civilians, to give them basic professional skills (behavioural standards, AIC, marksmanship training, etc.);
139


Throughout the career, the knowledge of the personnel is kept alive through stages of qualification and updating based on short and intense courses, seminars and intemships carried out both at regimental, brigade and intermediate level commands and at the Armed Forces Schools and/or at similar institutes of foreign Armed Forces.
The winners of the intemal competition who do not have a secondary school diploma (who therefore cannot be awarded a degree) instead follow a substantially similar but shorter process (around two years).
Later in their career, the personnel in question, based on employment prospects, can participate in the activities envisaged for RN Officers following initial training. In particular, within the specializations of RS Officers, the Specialization Course in Staff Activities will shortly be introduced, altemative and equivalent to the MS Course for RN Officers, aimed at providing basic knowledge and skills to operate effectively at the Commands of Large Units.
• differentiated, carried out at the Army/Corps Schools with variable duration, which gives the ability to use procedural and technical tools typical of the respective Arms/Specialties/Logistics Corps to operate in the reference scenarios ("Mission Oriented Training", " War” and “CRO”), within the platoons/companies.
At the end of the aforementioned process, the staff obtains a degree in Organizational and Management Sciences, issued by the University of Tuscia in Viterbo.
• a subsequent Application Course (about one year) - aimed at perfecting technical-professional skills and knowledge of a foreign language, as well as completing the cycle of university studies which includes, among other things, carrying out intemships at operational departments.
Mission Oriented”, “War” and “CRO”), plan the training activity and correctly manage logistical-administrative problems at platoon/company level;
6.1.1.3 The troops and communicative to operate as platoon commanders in the reference scenarios ("Training
• a Training and Specialization Course (two years), conducted partly at the Army Non-Commissioned Officers School of Viterbo (about one year), partly at the competent Weapons/Specialty Schools (about one year) and partly at the operational departments (Complementary intemship lasting approximately one month).
Throughout their career, staff preparation is updated through qualification and refresher stages.
Attendance at the Professional Refresher and Training Course constitutes a competitive test and barrier to entry into the role of Sergeants.
In particular, this training process, as regards the winners of the competition in possession of a secondary school diploma, is spread over approximately three years, during which said staff carries out: ____________ Therefore, a training process has been prepared for the Marshals which, for the majority of them, leads to the achievement of a degree.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The training process includes a 9-month refresher and professional training course, divided into a basic phase (approximately
5 months), conducted by the Army Non-Commissioned Officers School at the Cassino Volunteer Training Regiment and a specialization phase. (about 4 months), conducted at the competent Weapons/Specialty Schools.
Sergeants who demonstrate specific aptitudes are then qualified to perform instructor functions.
6.1.1.2 NonCommissioned Officers Role of Marshals In relation to the increased cultural level of the conscripts and volunteers, and the split of the category of Non-Commissioned Officers into the roles of Sergeants and Marshals, functions and responsibilities have been attributed to the Marshals which previously belonged to the Lower officers (for example, platoon command) and require greater cultural and professional skills than in the past. carrying out the remaining duration of the detention (total 14 months).
Sergeants Role Staff in the Sergeants role are assigned functions that translate into carrying out operational, training, logistical-administrative and/or technical-manual tasks.
Training process for Complementary Officers The current training cycle for Complementary Officers includes: • a course with an average duration of 5 months, aimed at giving the Student U. the basic preparation to carry out the functions of subordinate officer in the organisations/departments of employment; • assignment with the rank of S.Ten. complementary (1st appointment) to the employment bodies/departments for the 140


The activities of the 1st phase must be developed with intensity and without interruptions, involving the participation of all the personnel involved.
For specialization courses lasting longer than average (4 weeks) and carried out at operational regiments, the related activities will continue and can be completed at the destination operational companies.
1st degree of preparation (after 7-11 weeks), which confers the ability to survive on the battlefield, carry out security and self-defense tasks, as well as carry out all the functions connected to the assigned task (or to the 2nd task for the personnel already in military service and confirmed in the position previously held). Upon its achievement, the VFA can be used in surveillance and escort services in general, in interventions in favor of the community in the event of public disasters, in territorial control operations in collaboration with the police, as well as in logistical activities - Furthermore, VFAs coming from the military service, if confirmed in the role for which they have already completed specialization training, follow the specialization training in the second role assigned to them by the Regiment Commander, based on the operational needs of the department .
The training of these personnel is carried out directly at the employment units with modular criteria and involves 3 subsequent "levels of preparation", coinciding with the same number of operational employment profiles. In particular, the aforementioned degrees of preparation are divided as follows:
The specialization training is carried out, for the majority of assignments, at the operational regiments, except for some of greater technical content for which the activities are carried out at Schools/Institutions.
The VFA are recruited from personnel of different origins (civilians, soldiers on leave or in service) and therefore characterized by a heterogeneous initial operational capacity.
Short-term volunteers The preparation of the VFB is characterized by a homogeneous basic training and the achievement of a subsequent specialization of a multifunctional nature connected with the task to be carried out during the short-term period.
Training process for volunteers on annual leave (VFA) The first phase, relating to the 1st level of preparation, is divided into 4 modules:
- basic training (1-2 weeks); - individual combat training (1-3 weeks); - specialization training in the role (on average 4 weeks); - territory control training (1-2 weeks).
The programming of the third phase training is characterized by flexibility and finalization for use, so it can be defined according to operational commitments, also providing, if necessary, for the extension or repetition of the various modules (possibly to the detriment of others) .
After obtaining the 3rd level of preparation, without particular time constraints, the individual professional qualification module is conducted, lasting 3 weeks, dedicated to professional training.
Depending on the awarding of the three levels of preparation, the training process is divided into three training phases divided into training modules. ____________
• 3rd level of preparation (after 8-10 months), which integrates and perfects the operational skills already acquired in the previous levels of preparation, through the development of technical-tactical activities connected with the use of smaller units in combat, even in particular environments, within the Weapon/Specialty to which they belong.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The third phase, in which the 3rd level of preparation is reached, is divided into several modules: - specific Weapon/Specialty training (6-8 weeks); - training in particular environments (3 weeks); - improvement and training of minor units (6-7 weeks); - continuous off-site activity (army camp, itinerant activity along the peninsula, etc. for 3-4 weeks).
The activities of the 2nd phase, binding for the achievement of the 2nd level of preparation and for the consequent employment even "outside the area", are carried out with intensity and without interruptions, involving the participation of all the staff.
• 2nd level of preparation (after 11-17 weeks), which ensures the VFA's ability to carry out tasks related to use in low intensity peace support operations and humanitarian assistance interventions outside the national territory; • The second phase, connected with the achievement of the 2nd level of preparation, is divided into 2 modules: - corporals course (2 weeks); - training in peace support operations and humanitarian assistance interventions (4 weeks). administrative for the life and functioning of the departments;
141


In this framework, the specific objectives of the individual training of VSPs, placed temporally throughout their career,
are those of:
The training was therefore aimed at deepening knowledge relating to the role received and retraining for another role, as well as continuously updating the preparation already acquired.
• 2nd level of operation (10th month): complete fighter, trained and with satisfactory experience (can be used in all 1st level activities and in peace support operations); • 3rd level of operation (24th month): complete, well-trained and experienced fighter, with the ability to act and control other personnel in particular situations (is able to carry out tasks associated with use in particular environments and situations, whether alone or led by other men). This level is not necessarily achieved by everyone, but only by those who have completed specific courses - rifleman, marksman, amphibious and mountain mobility, etc. - and have been found suitable for advancement to the rank of Corporal Major or have participated in multinational operations for the period necessary to bear the relevant badge. continuity throughout the VSP's professional life;
• qualification, updating and maintenance of operational capacity, which are developed with • that completed during the short term • need to keep the level of preparation achieved updated over time; • need to create new stimuli in relation to the expected long stay in service.
• possible assignment, upon entry into permanent service, of a position other than 1st level of operation (5th month): basic fighter, trained and with little experience (has acquired the skills to be used in surveillance and escort services in general, in interventions in favor of the community in the event of public disasters, in territorial control operations in conjunction with the police forces, in humanitarian interventions, in the defense of national spaces. Furthermore, it is mainly used in training and education activities); environmental qualification course;
The general objective of the training of volunteers in short - marked by a strong realism and extreme concreteness, with the aim of enabling them to deal with diversified operational situations - is to give the personnel in question three levels of operation, which define the skills achieved and constitute orientation for employment purposes. In
particular: multinationals;
• basic training, consisting of a basic course and, possibly, a specialization course and a It follows that the VSP training process is divided into the following phases: ____________ In defining the VSP training system, the following factors were taken into account: • skills acquired during the short service, especially those connected with employment in operations
• command in team level formations; • “multifunctional” executive offices; • as an instructor at the Weapons/Specialties/Logistics Schools and at the operational departments;
• logistical-administrative, at the end of the "operational" employment.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it different in relation to changes in psychophysical abilities.
• update and expand, during service, the acquired preparation, also in correspondence with the expected grade advancements; • retrain and enable staff, at pre-established time points, to carry out tasks In particular, VSPs can carry out tasks:
Volunteers in permanent service The tasks to be assigned to this category of staff are grouped into 3 categories: operational, technical and logistical-administrative.
• deepen/perfect and, if necessary, requalify, initially, the technical-professional skills to carry out both the functions connected with the assigned task and the more general ones as a fighter;
• qualification for employment as team commanders and, for some, as "team" and team instructors (instructor of: driving school, weapon systems, individual combat training, etc.) in units powered by volunteers;
Basic training is divided into: - Basic course (about 3 months) at the Volunteer Training Regiments; - Specialization training (approximately 2 months) for the acquisition of a multi-purpose role at the competent Weapons/Specialty Schools.
142


(*) Personnel equipped with the department weapon.
In particular:
1st degree of preparation (within the 3rd month), which gives the soldier the ability to act and survive on the battlefield, carry out security and self-defense tasks, as well as carry out all the functions connected to the assigned task. Upon achievement, the soldier can be employed in surveillance and escort services in general, in interventions in favor of the community in the event of public disasters, in territorial control operations in collaboration with the police forces, as well as in logistical activities - Training process for conscripts The general objective of training conscripts is to give personnel three successive levels of preparation, which indicate the skills achieved and constitute an indispensable premise for employment purposes.
In general, the educational and training activities include night, instinctive, on-board and selective shooting lessons (with all the weapons supplied) and "fire" exercises at the various organizational levels (sq., pl., cp. , homogeneous and mixed cpls.min. and gr.tat.) daytime and nighttime.
NOTE: "Training" means training activities aimed at conferring basic combat skills (at individual/team level), while "Training" means those aimed at maintaining and perfecting individual skills and conferring the ability to act in the scope of the units of the various levels (sq., pl., cp., cpls.min. and gr.tat. homogeneous and mixed).
• update of preparation in relation to the introduction of new materials/weapons relevant to the position held; • requalification and qualification for a position in the logistics-administrative category, upon reaching an age no longer compatible with the performance of purely operational functions. •
• qualification in specific sectors of interest, in relation to the Weapon / Specialty to which they belong (courses in: daring, language, marksman, shooting instructor, parachuting, mountaineering, explosive ordnance disposal, etc.);
SUPPLIED (VSP, VFB, VFA, LEVER) • the first level concems all units regardless of their type and concems the preparation for the conduct of war operations, understood in the classic sense; the second level is differentiated in relation to the "package" to which the units belong and refers to the activities necessary to bring the instrument to conduct the foreseen and foreseeable operations ____________ • Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The preparation is divided into three closely related levels:
6.1.1.4 Preparation for operational cycles Use in theaters of operation requires particular training, defined as preparation, which includes a complex of essential activities to give the units the ability to carry out the assigned tasks.
In essence, the training system, characterized by great flexibility, is developed in successive training phases that cover the entire period of the service, according to training modules that follow one another based on priorities defined in relation to the possible employment options. connected with use in low intensity peace support operations and humanitarian assistance interventions; • 3rd degree of preparation (within the 10th month: maximum objective), inherent to the operational capacity of the previous degrees of preparation, increased and perfected through the development of technical-tactical activities connected with the use of smaller units in combat, also in particular environments, within the Weapon/ Specialty to which they belong.
NOTE (*) The data is valid for each member of the crew, as the staff rotates in the tasks envisaged within the same crew. administrative which are fundamental for the life and functioning of the departments; • 2nd level of preparation (within the 4th month), which ensures the soldier's ability to carry out the tasks
MISSILE C/EC HITS ARMORED TANKS
NUMBER OF SHOTS FIRED WITH WEAPONS 143


operational, with particular reference to: o psycho-physical recovery; o extraordinary maintenance of vehicles, materials and equipment; o verification of expressible operational capabilities.
In this phase, activities aimed at bringing the unit back to a level of full efficiency are developed Operating cycle The operating cycle of a department develops in four phases. o training of units supplied with conscript personnel; o training of units supplied with volunteers on annual leave;
These activities develop within an operational cycle, identifiable in a circuit that begins before the use of forces, continues during the mission and ends upon retum from the theater of operation for reconditioning, and then begins again in anticipation of a new commitment .
Reconditioning after use.
Furthermore, during deployment, activities are carried out aimed at maintaining individual training and department training up to platoon/company level, also using the simulation systems available. • to the type of enlisted personnel (VSP, VFB, VFA and conscript) with which it is supplied and, consequently, to its category. In particular, it is distinguished: within the framework of carrying out the other two strategic functions, "presence and surveillance" and "defence of extemal interests and contribution to intemational security"; the third level finalizes the preparation of a precise operational plan and concems exclusively the units pre-designated for intervention in a specific operation for which all the elements of interest are known.
Use It is the "highlight" moment of the operational cycle, the phase in which the department must implement what has been acquired in the previous phases, conducting a real verification of its operational capabilities.
The training of the Units, a phase naturally subsequent to the individual training, is essentially identified in the conduct of exercises, in open fire, which, from a perspective of progressive difficulty and complexity, are aimed at the acquisition and verification of the ability operational of a related unit phase includes the carrying out of amalgamation and mission-specific training activities, preparatory to entry into theatre.
The duration of this phase is in the order of 4 months. ____________ It is the condition in which the departments designated for a specific mission find themselves, for which all the elements of the situation are known, which allow specific preparation to be carried out (3rd level preparation) aimed at carrying out the assigned task. Regarding "outside area" operations, in this Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it apply specific procedures, in line with the specific NATO directives.
To appropriately finalize the preparation of the departments, it is necessary to conduct a series of training events which, linked together according to a consequential logic, allow the achievement of the training objectives set by the NATO STANDARDS, which then translate into operational capabilities. In this situation, in addition to individual training, different types of training activities have been defined, aimed at: Command Training It can essentially be defined as an overall training of the Cadres of a Command which Preparation for the execution of an order During this period the unit carries out the preparation activities called 1st and 2nd level, aimed at acquiring the capabilities required for the category of forces in which it is inserted (projection, reaction, presence and surveillance).
During this phase, however, a unit can be temporarily placed in a "ready to use" condition (units that are kept at a high state of readiness on a rotational basis). In this condition, the training activities developed by the departments undergo significant conditioning, related to the need to be able to be projected into operations within the times foreseen by the various states of alert. The duration of this phase varies depending on the operational commitments in progress.
Training of Commands and Units In the context examined so far, training takes on an extremely important role, capable of influencing the development of the operational cycle.
Generic preparation The "normal" situation and, therefore, the beginning of the operating cycle must be considered.
144 Unit Training


The operations carried out in this context have finally influenced and made more intense the relations between the Armed Forces and the civil society of the country, sensitive to the need for "stability and security" of its region and to the Intemational activities Finally, the complex of activities described above is increased through the development of training events abroad, aimed at perfecting and consolidating the response capabilities of the Commands/units and Staff at an intemational level, privileging the Command and Control function, in order to make the instrument increasingly efficient, reliable and capable of projecting itself at a considerable distance from the Motherland and of assuming, if necessary, the direction of multinational forces.
The aspects to be taken into consideration for the checks are: • "operational" efficiency of the staff; • individual knowledge of weapons; • level of shooting training; • formal structure of the units; • self-assessment of Commands/Units; • evaluation of Commands/ Units; particular activities.
Having now confirmed the insufficiency of the purely technical-scientific study process, abandoned in the mid-90s, an integration in the legal, political-economic and historical-social fields has been undertaken. In fact, if on the one hand we note the need to possess a good mathematical-scientific basis, to consciously operate in an environment with high technological contents and use the means to their maximum potential, on the other we note the opportunity to broaden the cultural horizon to the sphere of law, politics and sociology, in order to provide greater understanding of the realities of the areas of intervention and enable personnel to operate even in situations of non-belligerence, often unplanned, in a context where even the single behavior takes on public and intemational relevance.
The review of the Officers' training process started with the adaptation of basic training programmes, an action which was also affected by the profound regulatory change in the university education sector.
Training control The organization and execution of the training involve ascertaining and evaluating, during the various phases that characterize it, the improvements obtained and the results achieved, with a view to constant application (at all levels) of the concept of "lessons leamed", for a progressive elimination of deficiencies and gaps. Therefore, a widespread and continuous control action which must have educational and only marginally fiscal purposes is fundamental. o training of units supplied with volunteers on short notice; o training of units supplied with volunteers in permanent service. o five-year courses aimed at obtaining a specialist degree, in agreement with the Universities of Pisa, Genoa, Trieste and Naples, for Officers of the Normal Role; o application courses lasting one academic year for Directly Appointed Officers and Officers of the Special Role, or course lasting 3 months for Complementary Officers. ____________ Basic training is carried out at the Naval Academy through:
6.1.2 Navy
6.1.2.1 Officers The Officers' training process develops through the following fundamental steps: • basic training, • initial training (Qualification Courses), • intermediate training (Specialization Courses), • advanced training (Specialization Course). SM Normal Course and Joint Forces Higher SM Course) Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it • Alongside the exercises, there is a series of bilateral activities in which around 1,500 men including Officers, NonCommissioned Officers and Volunteers were involved.
To achieve these objectives, the Armed Force carries out diversified exercises abroad and, in particular, in Hungary, Lithuania, Romania, Poland, Bulgaria, Tunisia, Egypt and Sweden, through which, for Brigade level units, first firstly the projection capacity achieved and secondly the ability to manage crisis situations. These activities abroad, for the year 2001, involved approximately 10,000 men including Officers, Non-Commissioned Officers and Volunteers.
145


• the application of the "method" for planning and studying operational, logistical and other problems reference to the specific dimension of each FA;
On the occasion of the recent University Reform, steps were finally taken to establish a dedicated class of degrees, called "Defense and Security Sciences". This provision made it possible to activate "tailor-made" study courses for the Navy, significantly modifying the negotiating position towards the universities, which nevertheless remain the exclusive holders of the issuing of qualifications. In particular, the 2001/02 academic year saw the inauguration of the new degree course in "Maritime and Naval Sciences", carried out in agreement with the University of Pisa for the benefit of the Officers of the General Staff Corps.
• the acquisition of the work procedures of the SS.MM.; • updating and in-depth analysis in the geostrategic and geoeconomic field, with particular The definition of the training requirement described above and the regulatory provision for Officers in the normal role to obtain a degree initially constituted two objectives which were not exactly coincident, forcing the pursuit of difficult compromise solutions to be negotiated with the relevant Universities.
The Normal SM Course is carried out for the Normal Role Officers of all Corps; it lasts 3 months and constitutes a fundamental moment of connection between the different paths followed, aimed at:
At the same time, the need to direct the preparation of tomorrow's Commander and Director towards notions of economics, logistics and administration was considered.
The new professional figure implies modular training of a higher level than in the past, aimed at creating "high" profile specialists who, particularly in the Marshals role, may be able to lead groups of men. contribution that, as members of the intemational community, we are able to make, ultimately requiring a more solid preparation in the sector of communication and public information.
Joint Forces).
By adopting the same principle of progressive and harmonious development envisaged for Officers, a training process aimed at professional growth was planned, with reference to Legislative Decree 196/95 and the subsequent amendments made by Legislative Decree 82/2001.
6.1.2.2 Petty Officers ____________ The required change of pace is supported by advanced training programs, developed in two stages at the Institute of Maritime Military Studies (Normal Course of SM) and at the ISSMI (Superior Course of SM "Front line" employment in the Operational Departments concems Officers for about a decade, at the end of which the transition to the rank of Senior Officer opens up the prospect of employment in staff, Armed Force and Joint Force positions, both national and intemational.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it is finally integrated, for the benefit of the Officers designated for Command and Management roles, with specific refresher/indoctrination training modules, lasting 2-3 weeks and carried out in the form of seminars.
Advanced training continues, on a selective basis, with the Joint Forces Superior Course, aimed at taking on important roles in the FA and joint forces, both nationally and intemationally.
A limited number of Officers, destined for study and planning tasks for the acquisition of new vehicles and materials, subsequently complete their specialist training with university-level courses at military and civil institutes, both national and foreign.
The organization of these Departments envisages, in principle, two levels of employment of increasing responsibility.
The specialized training is therefore structured in two stages: • initial training, aimed at assuming the role of Naval Unit Component Chief (and corresponding roles in the other Departments); it is carried out through the Qualification Courses, lasting a maximum of six months, carried out at the MM Training Centers (Naval, Submarine, Aircraft, Amphibious, Incursion and Underwater, Mining and Mine Countermeasures, Hydrographic) and attended jointly by all the Officers of the Normal Role and the Special Role; • intermediate training, aimed at assuming the role of Head of Department of Naval Unit (and corresponding roles in the other Departments); it is carried out through specialization courses, lasting a maximum of one year, held at the MM Training Centres, the Naval Academy and/or FA or joint forces institutes, both national and foreign; they are attended by almost all the Officers of the Normal Role and, on a selective basis, by some Officers of the Special Role. orderly and organizational.
The subsequent training periods are based on the foundations laid during the basic training period, aimed at completing the specific preparation for the inclusion of personnel in the different Operational Departments.
146


Fire training for the Department also involves the average launch of around twenty missiles per tank/year.
For the amphibious force, in particular, training also takes the form of the consumption of approximately 1,500 – 2,000 rounds per marine rifleman, divided into various calibers (pistol, submachine gun, machine gun, etc.).
This appears fundamental for the success, efficiency and future effectiveness of the organization itself, as all the fields that characterize the Marshal are affected, with particular reference to the ethical-military one, to the art of Command, to the physical/ sports/maritime, as well as cultural and specialist ones. The subsequent moments of the training will be connected and will fit into what has already been acquired during the basic training process.
Last but not least, as regards training for combat under the surface of the sea (submarine activity and anti-submarine activity), torpedo launch activity is conducted on an annual basis for naval units and on a six-monthly basis for submarines.
The course in question has pre-eminent "value" for the FA and constitutes an indispensable and fundamental moment in the career process, characterized by strong continuity with previous personal experiences, during which the foundations are laid for the entire subsequent development of career.
Missile launch activities by naval units are carried out at the joint experimental range of Perdasdefogu, on an annual or biennial basis depending on the type of unit and the missile used.
The training period is followed by various subsequent moments, such as the "Practical Intemship" and any "Qualification Courses" on the specific equipment/systems of interest, in order to allow the Marshal to quickly integrate into new working contexts.
In the context of the topic, the innovation introduced in the basic training of new Marshals is highlighted, consisting of a two-year course at the FA Schools for the benefit of the winners of specific competitions for recruitment from the outside world, aimed at young people in possession of the diploma of upper secondary education, with the possibility of enrolling in university courses. During this first training phase we proceed to provide the basic knowledge necessary to profitably carry out the 2nd level tasks (Coordinator and/or Controller), together with the technical-professional knowledge, diversified based on the specialization to which one belongs. .
The training also takes the form of live-fire activities, where the ordinary consumption of ammunition is of the order of 100 shots/year for each embarked artillery system, an activity which also allows the accuracy of shooting against land targets to be verified (limitedly to caliber 127/54 and carried out on the Capo Teulada range), in anti-aircraft shooting (conducted on remote-controlled targets or on a hose towed by an aircraft) and anti-ship (on fast radio-controlled targets or on targets towed by another naval unit). ____________
6.1.2.4 Training activities To maintain the operational efficiency of the Forces, the ordinary training of naval units in the national field involves an average stay outside the normal locations of the order of three months/year (to which add activities of an intemational nature - NATO, EU or multinational - actual operations, presence and surveillance activities, etc.).
Also for this type of personnel, with the year 2003 and for a foreseeable quota of 500 units, the opportunity for the entry of women is envisaged, in relation to the annual competitions for Troop Volunteers on Short Duty (VFB/V3).
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
6.1.2.3 Troop For the troop it is necessary to continue the planning work aimed at technical-military training, differentiated according to the specialization of the individual soldier, together with the evaluation of the psychological profile and an additional "full immersion" type training module, for provide them with knowledge that may prove useful for their possible subsequent entry into the world of work.
A further significant innovation is represented by the planned entry of female personnel into the Marshals role, who starting from the 2001/02 school year will be interested in training at FA institutes.
The control of the overall efficiency of the naval units/departments is carried out through the "system for continuous control of the efficiency of forces". The data relating to this efficiency and their processing allow us to establish annual merit rankings based on the training level achieved. For individual naval units and departments, qualitative efficiency reflects the degree of personnel training and that of materials efficiency, while quantitative efficiency refers to the actual presence of personnel A further crucial aspect of the new professional figure arises from the reference legislation; we are referring to the staff in the top level of the aforementioned Marshals Role (First Marshals and Lieutenants), who must be able to be employed, in replacement of lower Officers, in positions of greater responsibility and with a particularly competitive professional profile compared to the “civilized” world.
147


present in the systems themselves; shooting in particular conditions of use for the riflemen of the Amphibious Force at a special simulator in Brindisi; to the govemment and management of underwater units, in favor of submarine personnel, at the Underwater Forces Command. staff, at the tactical simulator of the Taranto Training Center;
The overall preparation of the Armed Forces is evaluated considering the degree of global efficiency, obtained from the sum of the scores attributed to the overall efficiency of the individual naval units and departments. o it is divided into initial and advanced;
The training of Officers of normal roles The training of Officers, whose objective is cultural, moral, professional and ethical growth, must provide the necessary tools so that they can best carry out the functions of the rank, to improve effectiveness and efficiency of the FA and also be able to anticipate and manage changes. Must aspire to acquire an "open mentality" aimed at solving problems.
It is characterized by the following peculiarities: o it is differentiated by role. In fact, there is a training course for Officers of Normal Roles and a course for Officers of Special Roles; •
• the use of most of the weapon systems on board through specific simulation programs
• for use in the various forms of air-naval combat in favor of the commands of naval units and their relatives 1st degree - Unit/department unconditionally ready to carry out a war mission; • 2nd degree - Unit/department ready to carry out a war mission with some limitations; • 3rd degree - Unit/department ready to carry out a war mission with significant limitations; • 4th degree - Unit/department not ready for war mission.
Training, therefore, no longer relegated to a very limited period of time and no longer reduced to a set of notions imparted "one-off", becomes an integral part of professional life, a tool for growth and in-depth study and an important opportunity for that ideal osmosis that allows the exchange of information between the FA, the institutes, the attendees and vice versa. compared to the war tables and the actual quantity of material compared to the war supplies. The score calculated in this way is associated with the relative degree of readiness: •
6.1.3 Air Force 6.1.3.1 Officers The training of all personnel is divided into a basic process and an advanced process. This subdivision arises from the need to first provide those essential and indispensable elements of cultural, technical-professional and military knowledge, commensurate with the performance of the tasks/tasks that will be assigned in the initial years of the career; subsequently the advanced process provides for the improvement and specialization of the military personnel called upon to carry out tasks of greater responsibility and growing importance which cannot be separated from more rigorous preparation. • ____________ to the conduct of the maneuver of naval units in favor of young officers at the Naval Academy of Livomo;
Training is also integrated through the use of special training simulators:
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it • As regards the ranges and training areas, these are sufficient, except for those connected to training in complex amphibious activity, for which only the Capo Teulada range, owned by the Army, is available, which is unable to satisfy the needs of the Armed Forces in their entirety.
The training methodologies used in the aforementioned centers are similar to those in use at the Basic Operational Sea Training and the Joint Marittime Course of the British Navy and the Mine warfare Operational Sea Training developed by the Belgian and Dutch Navies, centers considered leaders within NATO in the specific sectors and also used by the Italian Navy for appropriate evaluation and comparison activities.
The Taranto MM Training Center carries out evaluations and checks on the training of units through TIRNAV (Naval Intemships) and CLA (Training Level Control); TIRNAVs are carried out at the end of long-term maintenance stops, while CLAs represent an additional training phase when, following a check, deficiencies are found in one or more sectors. The specialized mine countermeasures units carry out checks called CEB (war efficiency control), carried out by the Dredging Forces Command, to evaluate the combat readiness of the aforementioned units according to a preestablished test programme.
The Armed Force also uses simulators owned by the Army for anti-tank combat training by amphibious force personnel, according to times and methods agreed between the two Armed Forces.
Activities to control the level of training/efficiency are implemented through the chain of command of the Armed Forces; each commander has the responsibility to evaluate the efficiency of his unit or department, on the basis of appropriate directives issued by the higher commands.
148


Role of seamen The AM takes care of the training of seafarers through a complex and articulated selective/educational and training structure, which includes academic courses on the ground, on the simulator and in flight. Furthermore, initial or basic courses via computer are used more and more often. The management of the structure is mainly entrusted to the General Command of the Schools. The selection and training programs are implemented through national and foreign structures, the latter managed through specific MoUs. The periodic review of the programs allows the contents to be kept updated in light of new needs. The challenge for the future is to adapt the programs in question to the needs of the new flight lines being acquired (EFA, C130J, B767, F16, C 27). Among the long-term programs (post 2010), which could provide the greatest qualitative retum for the country, the project of a European flight school on our territory stands out.
The entire process has as its final objective that of preparing both culturally and professionally the Officer to assume (possibly also at a managerial level given the possibility of holding the rank of Colonel) staff positions within the High Command and, marginally, in the Air Force General Staff.
In this regard, the personnel of the corps follows specific degree courses already covered by the university system which are integrated with technical-professional subjects considered indispensable.
Training for normal roles involves obtaining a degree and a specialist degree from the Air Force Academy (for the role of navigators and the Armed Forces, the possibility of also involving the Florentine university is envisaged).
Subsequently, there are two other significant training periods in the ranks of Captain and Lieutenant Colonel which are carried out at the Air War School of Florence lasting 3 and 2 months respectively. prepare attendees to carry out the technical-professional functions and duties envisaged by the new "status", so that they are able to carry out specific tasks pertaining to the Army and the Role they belong to, as well as knowing how to apply previous knowledge in the military field. o is aimed at providing the necessary knowledge to carry out the assigned tasks.
The training of officers of special roles The initial training of special roles, taking into account their duties relating to employment and what is regulated by Legislative Decree 490/97, is based on an application course which takes place at the Application School of the 'AM of Florence. The course, which lasts more than three months, aims to: or is it continuous. Each Officer, therefore, is required, at different moments of his professional life, to attend appropriate training courses. ____________ All training of staff in normal roles, therefore, is based on a continuum of training moments, aimed at grafting new and increasingly in-depth knowledge onto well-established foundations.
Furthermore, a large number of Officers are selected to be sent to attend the ISSMI Course, preliminary to carrying out staff assignments both within the FA and in the joint and intemational context.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it After obtaining the Specialist Degree, the Officers of the normal roles combine the professional training courses, specific to the respective Role/Body to which they belong, with common training courses for all the roles carried out at the Air War School and in correspondence with particular career moments (taking on command roles, attending joint forces courses, etc.).
This regulatory instrument, in fact, has allowed, in agreement with the universities, the establishment of degree courses expressly dedicated to the personnel of the FF.AA. The study plan therefore represents the right combination of scientific, technological and humanistic disciplines and socio-political issues deemed necessary to be able to implement an "integrated" approach to the organisational, management and operational problems of the FA.
Furthermore, the Air Force attaches great importance to the training carried out by its Operations Departments. The training process to which the flight personnel is subjected is a long and onerous process which begins with the assignment to the operational conversion group, relating to the line of employment. After the transition to the new machine, a second phase of conversion to the weapon system is entered. Upon completion, the qualification of limited Combat Ready is achieved. Full Combat Readiness is achieved once the sailor demonstrates the ability to use the aircraft in all tactical events specific to the specialty to which he belongs. This milestone allows participation in any real operations. It will be followed by a The university training process for military personnel, officers of naval roles and officers of the military role, was designed taking into account the recent Ministerial Decree 12-4-2001 relating to the "Determination of the classes of university degrees and specialist degrees in defense and security sciences".
149


As regards training abroad, part of the student pilots of the normal role and some AUPC, at the end of their academic studies and BIE courses, are sent to the ENJJPT (Euro Nato Joint Jet Pilot Training) and to the SUPT (Specialize Undergraduate Pilot Training) in the USA, where they train on T37 and T38 aircraft, achieving the BPM in approximately 12 months.
It should be specified that at the flight schools of Latina and Frosinone an intense flight training activity is carried out aimed at personnel of the other Armed Forces, the State Armed Corps and other Public Administration Departments.
The activity of the 70th Wing of Latina is aimed at selecting student pilots of the AM and other state armed forces, obtaining the airplane pilot's license and carrying out the subsequent phases of the Initial Propeller License.
Flight training The flight training of the Air Force Officers of the AM is carried out both in Italy, at the 70th Wing of Latina, the 61st Wing of Lecce, the 72nd Wing of Frosinone, and abroad at some schools American flights.
All rotary wing training activities for obtaining the relevant patents are carried out at the 72nd Wing in Frosinone.
The problem is currently being investigated in greater detail, following specific indications from the Head of SMA.
In order to maintain a high level of training, the AM Operational Departments, in addition to normal flight activity, periodically participate in NATO/national exercises and activities on air/air, air/ground and electronic warfare ranges. further training activity following which the sailors will obtain a series of operational qualifications (pair leader, formation leader, chase, etc.).
This solution could guarantee resource savings while optimizing the training of support line pilots, anticipating, as was done in the past, training with multiple crews.
In this very delicate and vital sector of flight training, in order to keep time and costs as low as possible and in the constant effort to adapt training standards to operational needs, the AM has
• after obtaining the BNP, the navigators, before being sent to the OCU for the transition to the Tomado line, retum to the 61st Wing in Lecce where they carry out a pre-operational flight program on MB339CD. ____________ The review of the program for obtaining the Military Pilot License also aims to optimize and align the instructional programs in force at the flight schools, and also to allow the possible introduction of the "dual-track", i.e. the subdivision of the instructional process between the aerotactic line and the support line, using the P180 for the support line to achieve the
BPM.
In this regard, the training program was recently revised on the basis of suggestions received from the OCU (Operational Conversion Unit), from the employment departments and from the instructors themselves, to give greater emphasis to operational training: mainly tactical formations, air combat and low altitude navigation.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The training process, starting from 2001, will be divided into five phases: • the first, which is carried out at the 70th Wing in Latina, is dedicated to selection; • the second and third, carried out at the end of the 1st and 2nd academic year on the MB339 aircraft, are aimed at initial basic training; • the fourth, at the end of academic studies, lasts twelve months and is carried out at the US Navy base in Pensacola. The activity, carried out on T34, T39N and T2C aircraft and aimed at obtaining the BNM (Military Navigator's License), includes basic and advanced training;
Particular attention was also paid to the flight training of military navigators who, as is known, are destined only for the Tomado line. intended for fighter pilots.
The military pilot's license was obtained at the 61st Wing in Lecce and the pre-operational course was completed
Since 2000, students of the regular courses have also been sent to Canada to attend the NTFC (Nato Training Flying Canada) course, as part of an intemational program in which the Air Force participates fully, also providing three flight instructors of the General Command of Schools.
Currently flight training and selection involves accentuated attitudes and acrobatic activity in order to fully evaluate the student's potential to manage the machine in all flight conditions. Furthermore, considering that many competitors already have a civil licence, we want to verify whether their skills are limited to the basic handling of the aircraft, in which they are already experts or whether, in fact, they possess the necessary potential to become military pilots.
150


It should not be overlooked that intemational experience allows us to observe that the extensive use of advanced simulation, however realistic, deprives the crews of the indispensable experience of the operations carried out as a personal experience.
This statement emerges from a mere economic and operational evaluation of the problem and can be modified by evaluating the environmental and noise pollution problems that could make the necessary investment worthwhile.
Department training activities Flight activities are basically carried out at the Operational Conversion Units (OCU), for the flight personnel assigned to the duties of instructors of the flight groups, compatibly with the possibility of diverting men and aircraft from the primary activity at home. (Interactive Teaching of Official Students) which should allow for greater standardization in teaching as well as giving the student the opportunity to study, even independently, following and controlling their own progress.
In fact, to carry out the normal procedures of an advanced training phase, systems are needed that reproduce real performances with great fidelity. Consequently, costs increase and an accurate evaluation of the cost/effectiveness ratio of the simulators to be acquired with respect to carrying out training operations with scheduled aircraft is necessary (for example, some modem flight simulators allow the qualification on the machine to " zero hours" by the member in training, i.e. without carrying out any dedicated flight on the real airplane) even if the costs are however so high (a simulator of this kind can cost as much as two new aircraft), as to advise against purchasing the simulator if you don't have a large number of crews to train.
In fact, although part of the procedures and elementary operations can be carried out on systems comparable with commercial personal computers with a very high cost/effectiveness ratio, a different situation occurs with regards to advanced training.
Furthermore, we are convinced that teaching activities can be further improved by adequately exploiting multimedia.
In this field, the use of the INS.IAU program is underway at Frosinone airport operated and is still operating on various fronts: from the standardization of procedures, to the ground school programs, to the training of instructors, to teaching methodologies.
Generally, the sector that is most able to benefit from simulation is basic training.
In fact, given the widespread use of standardized commercial computer systems, it is possible to reach a large and qualified audience of young people who thus find an additional source of information. ____________ Simulators Thanks to the advanced technologies available, the Armed Forces of many countries plan to transfer substantial parts of training from airliners to simulators, ranging from basic and advanced training, to tactical events, such as in-flight refueling and air dropping. armament in range areas, training, maintenance.
Goose base in Canada. The research of these areas also concems the Mediterranean area, where there are possibilities being studied that would allow a realistic training activity to be carried out outside national borders, taking off from Italian bases.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it A further impact of the basic simulation is the possibility of using part of it for purposes of disseminating the image of the Armed Forces.
In particular, the use of advanced simulators (capable of reproducing complex situations) allows crews to be trained in the use of the machine, at the limits of performance and in threat conditions that cannot be reproduced in reality and furthermore, in the future, it will be possible connect the simulators of the different bases online so as to obtain joint training of distant departments for the benefit of standardization and interoperability.
It should be highlighted that the current restrictions of minimum quotas are poorly reconciled with the needs of the Operations Departments for advanced training. Restrictions that have required the development of activities abroad, in areas that allow the simulation of war missions, such as the flight program at the specific activities of the operational departments will be carried out in Sardinia, through the Aircraft Military Activity “AMA” program (Goose Bay) and the “Red Flag” exercise (Nellis Air Force Base-AFB).
Current training plans include an extensive use of basic simulation capabilities and a timely use of advanced simulation for combat lines.
In tum, the training activity carried out at the respective bases is aimed at obtaining the qualifications of Combat Ready (CR), Limited Combat Ready (LCR), Pair Leaders, Formation Leaders, Chase (guardian), etc.
151


The training dedicated to preparing for the role of sergeants is mainly based on a course lasting approximately four months at the Loreto Specialization School. The aim of the course is to give attendees the military, professional and cultural preparation suitable for the new "status" and which provides the necessary know-how for carrying out executive tasks with direct and personal responsibilities in the maintenance, operational and support sectors . The program was designed to achieve the objectives set, taking into account however that the attendees come from the Volunteer Role and already possess, albeit to a limited extent, certain military and professional knowledge.
6.1.3.2 Noncommissioned officers The issuing of Legislative Decree no. 196/1995 and the subsequent amendments made by Legislative Decree 82/2001 led to a new subdivision of the non-commissioned officer personnel of the Armed Forces, creating new roles and modifying their recruitment, status and advancement rules.
In this context, the process followed by seafarers also constitutes an effective tool to avoid operational use that is not commensurate with the actual skills acquired by each individual seafarer.
On the basis of this solid initial training, other important training sessions carried out at the Loreto Specialization School will be grafted. Their aim is to perfect the knowledge already acquired and to significantly increase the cultural and technical-professional background, through sociological and military disciplines, with a view to taking on command roles at unit head level. (English, IT and Intemet) considered extremely topical and necessary to constitute that tool kit to be used throughout one's career (intemational employment, relations with the outside world, for example, maintenance, supply companies, etc.).
Looking ahead, in the short-medium term, it is intended to maintain absolute priority for the activity of the Operational Conversion Units (OCU) and at the Operational Departments (RR.OO.) aimed at "reinforcing the ranks" of the Flight Groups (GG. VV.) due to the known reduction in personnel possessing qualifications and training levels as well as operational qualifications, limiting participation in events that lead to the subtraction of resources from the RR.OO. for activities at the mother bases.
Squadron Exchange Despite a clear decline in interest shown by allied countries (NATO activity for which only Italy and Germany seem to provide the greatest availability), the AM will participate in the "exchanges", encouraging them, with allied Operational Units that possibly have F16s supplied.
At the same time, within both years of the course, teaching activities relating to the three "I"s are carried out ____________ This is ensured through a two-year course at the AM Non-Commissioned Officers School of Caserta whose programmes, adapted to the educational qualifications held by those attending (high school diploma), include a first year of purely military and cultural subjects common to all categories for then arrive, in the second year, at a diversification based on the category to which they belong. A second year, therefore, more dedicated to the acquisition of professional knowledge which culminates with a series of stages/intemships in the maintenance and/or training departments in which the theoretical phase carried out at the Caserta institute is concretized through practical activities.
In particular, the planning of training for the Marshals role necessarily had to take into account the new duties assigned to this role. No longer, therefore, a purely specialized training aimed only at the acquisition of technical knowledge, but a "higher" level training that is essential to be able to also carry out tasks that involve the command, management and direction of small units. .
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
• provides the essential knowledge so that everyone is able to operate in their sector of employment with competence and professionalism; • is responsive to the real needs of the Armed Forces; • takes into account the cultural level of the recipient of the training event.
Even for staff in non-managerial roles, training: • focuses on several training "moments"; • constitutes the right balance between the set of specifically technical-professional knowledge and the set of military knowledge.
The first characteristics of each individual specialty, the second common for all;
The decree, among other things, provided for new tasks and responsibilities which, to be best performed, require adequate professional and military preparation. In this context, training takes on fundamental importance, the objective of which is to provide military, cultural, moral and technical-professional education.
152


• Specialization Course in Operational Meteorology, which aims to provide attendees with the basic theoretical and practical knowledge for their use in the central and peripheral meteorological bodies of the Service, both in the operational and development fields. • Specialization course in Atmospheric Physics and Meteorology, which aims to provide attendees with the basic theoretical and practical knowledge for their use in central meteorological bodies both in the operational field and in that of research and development. to operate at the Airport Meteorological Offices.
TA/AV staff Furthermore, as regards volunteer enlisted personnel, the FA provides for the attendance of some IT and English training courses as part of the Defense Eurotraining Project in order to increase the possibility of entering the world of work at the end of the service.
• Weather Information Course, which aims to qualify the attendee as an operator destined to be employed by the bodies that provide the Weather Information Service in the airport context. • Junior Weather Forecasters Course, which aims to qualify the attendee as an intended forecaster operate in the meteorological stations of the Air Force.
However, the FA considers it essential that they too are imparted with certain military and cultural knowledge as part of specific training courses. A course lasting more than three months is therefore envisaged for volunteers on short-term service and a course lasting almost three months for volunteers on permanent duty. The courses, obviously, are modular, so the knowledge acquired in the first is integrative and preparatory to attending the second.
The training of the Volunteer Role includes a predominant professional component, in consideration of the executive tasks that they are called upon to carry out within the FA. This knowledge, mainly aimed at "know-how", is acquired through courses of limited duration directly at the employment departments or with on-job training courses.
• Weather Observers Course, which aims to qualify ATG Non-Commissioned Officers as assistants capable of
• annual courses calibrated on the specific professional qualification needs for Officers of the special role (Application Course) and the technical-logistical role (Training Course for Officers of the • ____________ WEATHER Staff For the training and qualification of its personnel, destined to operate in the Weather Stations, in the Airport Meteorological Offices and in the central meteorological bodies, the AM Meteorological Service organizes and carries out systematically, at various levels, through the Training and Flight Assistance at Pratica di Mare Airport, the
following courses:
The duration of the training process varies depending on the case and the different types of employment but it has been estimated that the minimum time needed to train a Military Air Traffic Controller with maximum qualifications and qualifications is approximately five years.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The training courses include: the two-year period of Application and the third year of Specialization for Officers of the normal role coming from the Military Academy of Modena who, at the end of the five-year period, obtain a degree in law. In implementation of the recent university reform and following agreements stipulated with the University of Modena-Reggio Emilia and with the University of Rome Tor Vergata, they will obtain a first level degree in Legal Sciences, at the end of the three-year Academy - first year of Application, and the specialist one in Law, at the end of the five-year training period;
6.1.4 Carabinieri
6.1.4.1 Officers All officers of the force, regardless of their role, attend the Carabinieri Officers School in Rome for their training and subsequent updates.
The training process involves the achievement of various qualifications, at the end of as many professional training courses, and various qualifications which allow the military controller to be "certified" to operate, in the various operational positions, at a Control Tower, a Service Approach, a GCA Radar, a Coordination and Control Service of the Air Force.
The staff dedicated to the "Air Traffic Control" sector is mainly selected from among the Officers of the Arms Role in Permanent Service and the Marshal students who enter the Non-Commissioned Officers Training School of Caserta by competition. , The Air Force is also assigned the task of providing Flight Assistance services for civil and military air traffic operating on military and military airports open to civil air traffic and in the relevant airspace.
153


the spirit of initiative; • physical education, to prepare men for action, making them capable of facing all challenges
• military education, necessary to carry out the related tasks and specific functions; • technical-professional education, which is the basic prerequisite for staff to be qualified to carry out the complex institutional tasks assigned to them successfully and with high performance; • the refinement of intellectual faculties, aimed at developing the ability to evaluate situations e The Institute Course for Captains close to promotion to a higher rank is also intended for officers in the normal role. This is a qualification course of particular value, whose training process has recently been revised to further enhance the technical-professional teachings necessary to independently carry out the functions of the higher degree, making use of teaching in interdisciplinary modules and "full-immersion" and correspondence-type criteria and procedures. In succession to the Institute Course, the Captains carry out a specialization course, at the end of which they obtain a second level university "master's", acquiring a set of knowledge and methodological, technical and managerial skills aimed at allowing them to operate with success in the institutional structures and in the joint forces field in the managerial and staff positions to which they will be assigned, and to prepare for the subsequent selections for admission to the Joint Forces Higher Staff Course, in the military field, or to the advanced training courses for Officers/ Functionaries of the Police Force.
Other courses, of a non-continuous nature, are activated for specific and contingent needs, such as that of the expected transit of Officers from the other Armed Forces in 2002. in the newly created technical-logistical role.
The Student Battalions of Turin and Fossano and those of Benevento and Reggio Calabria depend respectively on the Student Schools of Turin and Benevento, intended to train the auxiliary Carabinieri. The training process consists of eleven months of course for the actual Carabinieri (five for those coming from the auxiliary Carabinieri) and three months of course for the auxiliary Carabinieri. The specific training includes:
The Carabinieri Cadet School of Rome, intended to train effective Carabinieri, has under its command the Cadet Battalions of Rome, Campobasso and Iglesias. • RTL), the first coming from the Complementary Officers and Marshals of the Force, the second from the winners of the specific competition; the Technical-Professional Course, lasting two months, intended for first-appointment officers in service, coming from Army Schools.
6.1.4.3 Carabinieri Students The Schools provide military and technical-professional training for young people who join the force to become Carabinieri. ____________ The Cadet Marshals attending the two-year training courses in Velletri (1st year) and Florence (2nd year), who now obtain the university diploma in "Applied criminological sciences", with the implementation of the university reform and the consequent suppression of the aforementioned title academic, they will, however, accrue the corresponding university training credits, useful for obtaining the first level degree.
6.1.4.2 Marshals and Brigadiers The School is based in Florence and has dependent regiments in the same city and in Velletri (destined for the Marshals) and Vicenza (destined for the Brigadiers). It takes care of the basic training and updating during the career of the Marshals of the role of inspectors and of the Brigadiers of the role of superintendents of the Force, as well as the qualification of the soldiers of the same roles according to career advancement and the hiring of positions of particular institutional importance (such as, for example, Station Command). Numerous specialization courses are also held at the School Regiments.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it situations where physical vigor and resolute decision are required.
The Officers School also takes care of the editing of the quarterly magazine "Review of the Carabinieri", which deals with topics of a military, legal, historical, economic and social nature for the updating of all the personnel of the Carabinieri and publishes monographs of in-depth study of specific topics of professional interest.
At the Officers' School, recently identified as the "Centre for the development of doctrines and personnel training", conferences and seminars are also held for the in-depth study of specific topics and emerging problems, promoted by the General Command and by the School itself. , which makes use of the prestigious chairs of "Professional Techniques", "Investigative Techniques", "Peacekeeping Operations and Military Art", "Military Law" and "Informatics", included in the Institute of Professional and Legal-Military Studies.
In order to give the teaching action a more accentuated practical dimension, specific study sessions have been established at the various schools for the in-depth study of technical-professional problems, Other courses of shorter duration are intended for Officers about to assume commands of particular professional value, such as, for example, the Provincial Command and the Territorial Company Commands.
154


maintenance of the OSP and in particular control and intervention on the national territory for the prevention and contrast of particular criminal phenomena, in The Units must be able to provide modular "force complexes", capable of carrying out functions: • "combat" in PSO (Peace Support Operations) and/or low intensity conflicts: or as "light" military forces with tasks of observation (observation and alarm posts), surveillance and control of the territory, interposition, checkpoints (control posts), protection of refugee camps, convoy escorts, patrolling, defense of itineraries, interventions in areas with low visibility or poor practicability (inhabited, wooded, mountainous, hilly, etc.), HUMINT (Human Intelligence) and recovery of compatriots abroad; or as special forces with SWAT capabilities ("Special Weapons and Tactics Team") for decisive interventions (release of hostages, recovery of compatriots) or for security, temporary defense and the eviction of personnel from diplomatic and consular offices abroad; or as police forces responsible for carrying out military police tasks within the FF.AA units. national and/or in multinational bodies and departments, civil police in favor of local populations in the terms established by intemational agreements and mandates and training, support and support for local police;
Further specialist training activities are carried out at the "specialised" units of the Army which also have resources dedicated to meeting particular needs. the Training Center of the newly established 2nd Mobile Brigade, based in Livomo, which deals with the basic and amalgamation training of the personnel and departments destined to carry out intemational PSO missions and, in particular, of the Carabinieri units operating in the Multinational Specialized Unit (MSU); the Shooting Training Center, based in Rome, which has ranges and equipment for the simulation of operational intervention situations and carries out studies and experiments on armament and equipment material and intervention techniques, as well as courses for shooting and marksman instructors also for other Armed Forces; the Alpine Training Centre, based in Selva di Val Gardena (Bolzano), which takes care of the training of skiers, rock climbers, mountain rescue workers, avalanche teams, as well as the preparation of soldiers belonging to the Winter Sports Section who represent the Army during sporting competitions; the Specialized Training Center for Telematics in Velletri, which trains specialists and carries out refresher courses on the subject.
6.1.4.4 Training activity for departments assigned to military tasks The Carabinieri departments assigned to military tasks must be able to perform various functions simultaneously, expressing a high degree of flexibility and therefore force devices to be calibrated based on the type and phase of the mission, the level of military and social conflict and the different contingent situations of the OSP (Public Order and Security), both abroad and at home. • Among the departments responsible for the specialized training of Army personnel, the following should also be mentioned: through the presentation of real cases, as well as the preparation of simulations. This last training function was entrusted to qualified Company and Station commanders, selected nationally on the basis of personal qualities and previous professional experience in order to guarantee a direct link with the operational reality. The activity, which completes the experiences acquired during the practical-applicative intemships carried out at various levels, also made it possible to create a team of experts, essentially incorporating the figure of the commander-teacher, employable for limited periods of time and , with good reason, in the training sector. • • ____________ • Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it Finally, great importance is given to the teaching of applied information technology which has been included in all training and refresher courses for the Army personnel: since 2001, Officers, Marshals and Carabinieri who leave the training courses obtain the "European IT licence" and the qualification to consult and update police files.
Maximum impetus is given to the study of the English language and the so-called "rare" languages to satisfy the pressing operational needs imposed by immigration and the globalization of the terrorist threat and organized crime. • Furthermore, it is worth mentioning the numerous activities carried out, also in collaboration with university structures and extemal institutes operating in the sector, aimed at the qualification of personnel from a linguistic point of view, to meet the needs arising from the intensification of relations with the Armed Forces and of foreign police forces and the development of the intemational dimension of the force, connected to participation in peacekeeping missions. As evidence of the extent of the resources devoted to the specific sector, it should be highlighted that, in the last two years, approximately 5,000 soldiers of the Army, of all ranks, have been interested in attending language courses or have participated in assessments to verify their level of knowledge possessed.
155


The Army currently has 250 training facilities, including shooting ranges and training areas, variously distributed throughout the national territory.
6.1.5 Ranges, training areas and simulators 6.1.5.1 Managed by the Army Training activity in Italy is unfortunately penalized by the lack of training areas.
The training activity is carried out by the Mobile Unit Training Center and by the Training Departments of the various Regiments for the benefit of the personnel of the dependent Units, but also of those coming from other departments of the Army, destined for operations outside the area and/or particular tasks, i.e. than that of other FF.AA. and national and foreign police forces.
In order to guarantee the maintenance of high standards of efficiency, an intense training cycle is carried out using the FATS (Firearms Training Systems) interactive shooting system, which constitutes an effective tool for perfecting and integrating the level of preparation of the military in all the many aspects connected with the use of weapons, in the diversified simulated operational situations. • In this circumstance, it is necessary to highlight the lack of closed or open-air military ranges and equipped training areas which sometimes affects the carrying out of fire exercises to increase individual and team training and the command and coordination capacity of the Commanders. • framework for the protection of free institutions, integrating and strengthening the action of territorial units; training in favor of their own departments and CC units destined for operations abroad and/or belonging to other organizations of the Army or even of other FF. AA. national in specialized sectors (escorts/riot control, etc.); defense of the integrity of the Italian territory and collective NATO, in the framework of combined joint operations.
• preparatory: at small shooting ranges; • military: intended as combat training; • emergency: aimed at implementing the technique of extemporaneous use of individual weapons. ____________ A similar impulse is given to shooting training which is carried out through the following phases:
In order to ensure high operational efficiency, in the context of the alliances in which the country is inserted, specific training cycles are carried out on an annual basis at the Military Schools of OBERAMMERGAU and PFLLENDORF (D), aimed, respectively, at enhancing the preparation of the executives and of the non-managerial personnel included in the Allied General Staff and in the units responsible for the SWAT capacity for decisive interventions, i.e. for security, temporary defense and the clearing of personnel at diplomatic offices abroad.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it In summary: • basic and specialization training for peace support operations is carried out in a unitary and coherent manner for all by the Mobile Unit Training Centre, with the support of the Training Department of the 1st Regiment. CC par. for the military and special part; • maintenance training of personnel employed by the Rgt. and that of updating and amalgamation for the soldiers of the Army coming from other departments to be redeployed abroad, with the Training Departments of the Regiments.
The teaching activity focuses on combat training and anti-riot techniques, insisting in particular on the military and public order aspects - which appear basic and indispensable not only for the efficiency of the departments, but also for the safety of the personnel - not however, neglecting HUMINT (Human Intelligence) activity, military police and humanitarian law.
This organization, although consolidated for some time, is no longer suited to current training needs, deriving from the process of professionalization of the Armed Forces, from new employment scenarios and from the evolution of the weapon systems used.
In particular, the soldiers of the Corps, volunteers for deployment abroad and already selected according to criteria established by the General Command, constitute the supply basin for the CC departments abroad only after having carried out a period of preparatory training for these missions at the aforementioned Training Center.
156


• to the "mission" conduct for the crew of the ARIETE tank and the CENTAURO 8x8 AFV armored vehicle;
• functional of the operators and fire controllers for c/a systems (HAWK, SKYGUARD, STINGER and units and Commands, based on the marked use of simulation and divided into: o 2 Simulation Centres, respectively at the Civitavecchia War School (for This system, currently distributed to the Lecce Cavalry School and to the Line Cavalry and Tank Regiments (in the version without the control module), will constitute one of the basic systems in the creation of combat training centres.
In particular, the Armed Forces has recently acquired a system (SAAB BT 46) which also allows the management of activities in a centralized manner, through a control module which can be permanent (in a fixed structure) and mobile (therefore usable in any firing range ).
• organizational rationalization of the sector, through the division of the structures into 3 functional levels (respectively for basic training, for thematic-plurithematic training and for the evaluation/validation of Commands and units) and the adoption of an effective model management, which involves freeing the operational units from the infrastructural management of the ranges (responsibility progressively assigned to the Infrastructure Inspectorate); • creation of a specific organization for the preparation, evaluation and validation of • • In this context, the Armed Force has defined a project, currently being implemented, which, in summary, is aimed at achieving the following main objectives: • reduction of the number of structures not suited to the needs of the Army, with undoubted positive effects both on the optimization of available resources and on the environmental impact of training activities;
Various types of multiple integrated laser beam simulation systems are available, which allow complexes of forces of various magnitudes and nature to interact, with the immediate reporting of the effects of the fire.
In fact, despite a large number of structures, there is a lack of national ranges and training areas with potential (in terms of size, simulation equipment, accommodation possibilities, etc.) that allow the carrying out of "joint and/or combined” and with opposing parties, activities that have become basic for the preparation of Commands and units actually used in operations.
Simulators are available for training: shooting with portable weapons and c/c weapons (MILAN, TOW, Folgore and Panzerfaust); flight and "mission" conduct for helicopter pilots (for AB 205 and AS 129 aircraft) and maintenance for specialists (for the A 129 aircraft); • functional of the crews of the ARIETE, LEOPARD 1A5 tanks and the CENTAURO armored cars;
2nd level simulators (for department training at platoon/company level) • ____________
Level 1 simulators (for individual and crew training) Below is a summary of what is underway and the short-medium term prospects in the specific sector.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it • Simulators are being procured for training: piloting, "turret" activity and "mission" conduct for the crews of the ARIETE tank and the CENTAURO 8x8 AFV armored vehicle (introduced in 2005); piloting, turret activity and mission conduct for the crews of the APC DARDO and the VBC 8x8 AFV (introduced in 2008).
Use of simulation The Armed Force has for some time now launched an intense program aimed both at achieving alignment with NATO "policy" in the specific sector and at increasing the use of simulation in the various training sectors. o 3 combat training centres, respectively at the ranges of Capo Teulada (for "heavy" units), Monteromano (for "light" units) and Torre Veneri (for the training of armored and armored crews).
SIDAM).
These are the most complex simulation systems, as they must allow training and/or evaluation of B. and RGt. PCs to be carried out, through the conduct of activities in real time (with the creation of unforeseen situations and the event simulation) and the possibility of applying standardized C4I procedures.
Level 3 simulators (for command and staff training) Commands at Brigade level) and the Infantry School of Cesano (for Commands at regiment level);
157


The use of the aforementioned structures, especially those of larger dimensions and training potential, is sometimes limited by certain environmental constraints, which essentially manifest themselves in: • periods of suspension of activities due to local socio-economic needs (fishing periods, seasons
• activated a program for the use of training ranges abroad; • developed and launched a specific project for the reorganization of the sector.
POLYGONS IN THE TUNNEL (*) In order to overcome the above-mentioned problems, the Armed Forces has:
• exercises aimed at the evaluation and validation of the Commands and units at the various organizational levels (from the platoon to the tactical group).
In this context, through the stipulation of specific MOUs, the Army currently has the possibility of using the following
structures: homogeneous and mixed tactical group;
• to carry out evaluation and validation exercises of operational capabilities. that CRO;
In this sector, the Armed Forces is acquiring a German system (which can be interfaced with SIACCON), already positively tested in the context of 2 exercises at regimental and brigade level, which will constitute the "soul" of the simulation centers of Civitavecchia and Cesano .
• throwing of the hand grenade and use of explosives; • shooting training with individual and department weapons; • shooting exercises with mortars, artillery and c/cec/a weapon systems; • "blank" and "fire" training and exercises at squad, platoon, minor complex and level polygons, have taken on completely different dimensions.
• proximity of the training facilities to population centers which, compared to the years in which they were established i ____________ The Armed Forces uses its ranges and training areas to carry out the following activities: multimodal;
ACTIVITIES CARRIED OUT IN TRAINING FACILITIES Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it completely on military structures;
• establishment of protected natural areas (parks, oases, etc.) in areas that partially exist Some of the above structures are also used by the Navy and the Air Force, the most important of which are Capo Teulada, Monteromano, Carpegna, Torre Veneri and Cellina Meduna.
• to perfect the capabilities of force projection, through the use of an organization
• develop training activities, even complex ones, in "joint and combined" contexts and in both WAR scenarios
MAIN TRAINING AREAS OF THE ARMY tourism, etc.);
Starting from 1997, the Armed Forces launched a specific program aimed at guaranteeing the availability of a series of ranges abroad which would allow the Commands and units to:
POLYGONS IN TUNNELS NEXT TO BE CONSTRUCTED
INTERFORCE SHOOTING RANGE Use of ranges abroad
MEASURES ADOPTED BY THE ARMY
CONDITIONS ON THE USE OF THE STRUCTURES
ARMY RANGE AND TRAINING AREAS 158


159 Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
- Smardan (Romania); - Drawsko and Ustka (Poland) ____________
- Koren (Bulgaria); - Cap Serrat (Tunisia); - El Hamman (Egypt); - Vidsel (Sweden); - Yavoriv (Ukraine) (*) Definition as per SME circular no. 106 “Regulations for the reclamation of polygons” Ed; 1968; (**) Indicate if subjected to environmental protection. National/regional parks/areas subject to environmental protection.
- Varpalota (Hungary) In particular, during 2001 the Pabrade, Varpalota, Ustka, Drawsko, Koren and Cap Serrat ranges were used.
- Pabrade (Lithuania)
- Operated by the Navy
RANGE MANAGED BY THE NAVY
LAND TRAINING AREAS MANAGED BY THE NAVY


CIVIL DEFENSE PERSONNEL 160 Furthermore, while there is, in percentage, a significant shortage in medium-high qualifications: area C economic positions C3, C2, C1 and area B economic position B3; in the lowest qualifications there are redundancies with reference to area B economic position B1 and to area A economic position A1 (tables 1 and 2).
7.2 STAFF
7.1 CIVIL PERSONNEL The first redetermination of the workforce in the above-mentioned reduction perspective was carried out with the Prime Ministerial Decree of 26 June 1998 which established the total workforce at 45,740 units, for which as of 1
June 2001 there were 40,304 employees with a shortage of 2,696 compared to the staff expected when fully operational (43,000 units).
7.2 Staffing The staffing of civilian personnel was established with Legislative Decree no. 265/1997 in 43,000 units, to be reached at the conclusion of the restructuring process and "in any case within eight years of the entry into force of the same legislative decree" (August 2005). ____________ However, the aforementioned shortcomings could also be satisfied through the activation of the training courses envisaged by the National Collective Labor Agreement (CCNL), which would allow, with the professional advancement of employees, a more rapid fulfillment of personnel needs, felt above all in higher qualifications.
Civilian personnel, in relation to the significant reduction of the military component, is destined to take on increasingly greater importance over time at all organizational levels, both central and peripheral.
It is clear that in order to completely make up for the staff shortages through extemal recruitment, the related costs and the financial resources needed to deal with them cannot be ignored.
The staff retraining procedures, still underway, will produce an initial effect of making up for the deficiencies especially in positions C2 and B3, but will have as a consequence a corresponding increase in the deficiencies in area C, as regards the economic position C1. This provision may be overcome, in whole or in part, either with extemal recruitment, the reactivation of which took place last year following the expected authorizations from the Presidency of the Council of Ministers, or with the re-employment of any redundancies among the staff military, in implementation of law n.331/2000, establishing the professional military service.
The employees in question are managed by the General Directorate for Civilian Personnel established in 1997 with the simultaneous suppression of the pre-existing General Directorates of Employees and Workers.
The functions of the civil component are mainly administrative and partly technical, all aimed at supporting the military instrument as a whole.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
SITUATION
CIVIL DEFENSE PERSONNEL
7.1 Civilian personnel The Defense structure includes a substantial and valid civilian component. In relation to the ongoing restructuring processes, just as the military personnel will be reduced from 385,880 units in 1985 to 190,000 in the near future, so the civilian personnel from 53,000 units - distributed among personnel with functional and managerial qualifications - in 1985, will have to, by 2005, reach 43,000.
7.5 CIVIL PERSONNEL: A NEW CONCEPTION. PERSPECTIVES 7.6 ROLE OF
STAFF REPRESENTATIVES
SITUATION
7.3 EMPLOYMENT OF CIVIL PERSONNEL
7.4 USE OF EXTERNAL STRUCTURES (OUTSOURCING)
PART VII
THE CIVIL PERSONNEL


Nonetheless, organizational models require such performance. Hence the need to resort to extemal companies that guarantee such services.
Some services that must necessarily be ensured (in particular cleaning services, canteens, etc.) for their completion require tasks that are no longer attractive to Defense employees in the current socio-cultural context.
In this context, the result is a reduction in lower level staff (positions A1 and B1), with exclusively manual and executive tasks.
7.4 Use of extemal structures (Outsourcing) This provision, without prejudice to the spending constraints relating to civilian personnel, will have to take into account the new employment positions emerging from the ongoing restructuring which show a significant need, in medium-high qualifications, deriving on the one hand from the need to acquire new professional skills especially in the technical and IT sector, on the other hand by the expected progressive replacement of military personnel with civilian personnel for the performance of logistical and administrative support functions.
On the other hand, staff mobility, if contained within acceptable terms, does not generally encounter resistance. If, on the contrary, one wanted to use it as a general tool to meet necessary needs, one would encounter insurmountable obstacles, both due to the physiological reaction of the staff who see consolidated family, housing, relational and income situations compromised, and due to the current impossibility, on the part of the Administration, to be able to reduce the inconveniences resulting from a new location into acceptable areas.
In the situation described above, with respect to the gradual process of approaching the workforce of 43,000 units, the staffing levels referred to in the aforementioned Prime Ministerial Decree of 26 June 1998 will be redetermined.
For extemal recruitment, and within the foreseen and possible limits, the coverage of those positions for which filling from within is not practicable could be reserved.
In fact, faced with oversized areas, in terms of the presence of civilian personnel, there are situations of critical undersizing.
In this context, it will be necessary to verify the existence of adequate professional figures to manage and guarantee the implementation of the structure envisaged by art.5, paragraph 1, of law 16 November 2000, n.331, which will have to provide for the employment of military personnel dismissed volunteers.
Therefore, in these cases, it is not so much the containment of costs that is highlighted, but the unavoidable need to pursue and achieve institutional goals.
7.3.2 An aspect that deserves reflection and that will have to be addressed to reduce, within physiological limits, the obstacles that stand in the way of greater use of civilian personnel within the new professional structure of the Armed Forces is certainly to be identified in the non-optimal distribution of the same in the territory. ____________
TECHNICAL - OPERATIONAL AREA Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it But sometimes even higher professional skills, if absent in the Defense organization due to the need to satisfy the Administration's needs, may have to be outsourced (computerization of technical services, planning of engineering services).
Therefore, outsourcing opportunities must be carefully evaluated, either due to financial problems or due to the objective impossibility of having the necessary human resources.
TECHNICAL-ADMINISTRATIVE AND TECHNICAL-INDUSTRIAL AREA
CIVIL PERSONNEL ON DUTY AT:
Furthermore, the extemal opening of synergistic forms of private work contributions can also have beneficial effects on the reduction of management costs of certain services.
7.3 Employment of civilian personnel
7.3.1 Civilian personnel are employed, in addition to the offices directly collaborating with the Minister, as per Presidential Decree no. 241 of 14 May 2001, which came into force on 11 July, in the technical area -administrative and in the technical-operational area, as shown in the following tables 3, 4 and 5:
161


Trade union participation, beyond the formulas which only abstractly seem to strengthen its role, essentially has dialogue and discussion as its essence. It is in the dialectics of the parties, in the strength of the motivations and in the need to achieve certain goals that it is necessary to find the resulting solutions that best balance the various interests at stake.
Other reflections will be made on the topic and this is why the Govemment has asked for a delegation from Parliament to be able to update an initial intuition, which must be verified and correlated with changing situations and events that push in directions that may even be different from those in initially hypothesized.
Up until now there has probably been a lack of a personnel policy which, in addition to management, which in any case should not be underestimated, due to the virtuous effects it can produce, if taken care of in terms of timeliness and effectiveness of administrative action, prefigures a development of human resources.
But beyond the numbers, the figures, the recruitment and advancement systems, an irreplaceable and decisive element can only be identified in the subjective response that everyone is called to give in their work activity.
The appreciated action carried out by the national and local trade union organizations has made it possible to achieve, albeit sometimes amidst physiological difficulties and divergent points of view, positive results for the start of the reform process whose state of progress is not yet definitive drawing.
7.6 Role of staff representatives Staff representatives also have a significant role to play.
7.5 Civilian personnel: a new concept. Perspectives Various elements can have an impact on enabling a Defense performance adequate to intemal and extemal expectations.
It cannot be ruled out, without prejudice to the activity to be carried out by the Administration, that, also for this need, the opportunity of outsourcing certain professional contributions that contribute to the optimal achievement of the pursued objectives may be assessed.
All of this can find a valid aid, on the one hand by rediscovering the awareness of belonging to an Administration which has never before been called upon, at a national and intemational level, to express a serene determination in acting, on the other by assuming, to maximum levels of responsibility, coherent behavior that knows how to interpret values to be strengthened and transmitted to all collaborators, in a renewed spirit of common action involving the entire working community. ____________ Here then is the need on a personal level to set daily objectives which in temporal sequence will be able to achieve the primary objectives of the Administration; even long-term objectives require the achievement of short-and medium-term objectives.
Obviously everyone without distinction, at every level, is required to deal with the dynamics of the organization so that the same, in a constant evolution, maintains high profiles of the institutional image.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The joumey will be easy to the extent that it is understood that we proceed side by side in the awareness of a path whose destination is common.
Particular attention must be paid above all to the identification of the so-called "key resources", understood as units that are potentially called upon to play a decisive role in making the Defense function competitive.
There is no doubt that the sum of the performances thus rendered optimizes the system.
Therefore, there is no prejudice in addressing together with the Union problems which affect the future of the Administration and whose repercussions also affect the staff.
The valorization of the individual, when inserted in a working context, constitutes a multiplier of performances, both in qualitative and quantitative terms.
162


The following are part of the Council - which holds office for 4 years -: the first president of the Court of Cassation, who presides over it; the military attomey general at the Court of Cassation; five members elected by military magistrates, of which at least one is a military magistrate of the Supreme Court; two members outside the military judiciary, chosen by agreement between the Presidents of the two Chambers from among ordinary university professors in legal subjects and lawyers with at least fifteen years of professional practice: one of them is elected by the Council as Vice President.
The Minister, however, cannot be present at the deliberations.
8.10 CONSIDERATIONS
8.11 APPLICATION OF THE MILITARY CRIMINAL CODE OF PEACE (AND
NOT OF WAR) DURING MILITARY MISSIONS ABROAD – PROBLEM
ASPECTS On matters within the Council's competence, the Minister of Defense can make proposals, make observations and can intervene in Council meetings, when requested by the President or when he deems it appropriate, to make communications or provide clarifications.
8.1 GENERAL
INFORMATION 8.2 MILITARY JUDICIAL COUNCIL 8.3 MILITARY
JUDICIAL ORGANIZATION 8.4 JUDICIAL ACTIVITY:
STATISTICAL DATA 8.5 JUDICIAL STAFF 8.6 NONJUDICIAL STAFF 8.7 ASSIGNMENT OF
MILITARY STAFF 8.8 ESTABLISHMENT OF GI
POLICE SECTIONS MILITARY JUDICIARY 8.9 THE
MILITARY PENITENTIARY ORGANIZATION (OPM – EXECUTIVE BODIES) In particular, it decides on the hiring of the Military Judiciary, on the assignment of offices and functions, on transfers, on promotions, on disciplinary sanctions, on the assignment of extrajudicial tasks to military magistrates; expresses opinions and can make proposals to the Minister of Defense on modifications to military judicial districts and on all matters conceming the organization or functioning of services relating to military justice; gives opinions on bills conceming problems in the judicial sector.
MILITARY JUSTICE
PART VIII The CMM is, in fact, competent to decide on every state provision conceming military magistrates and on every other matter delegated to it by law.
In order to guarantee the same independence recognized to ordinary judges, the Council has, as already mentioned, the same powers as the CSM, including those conceming disciplinary proceedings against military magistrates. ____________
8.2 Council of the Military Magistracy With law 30.12.1988, n.561, the CMM was established, a self-goveming body, subsequently regulated with Presidential Decree of 24.3.1989, n.158.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it In each military court, a 1st degree judicial body, an office of the judge for preliminary investigations and one of the judge for the preliminary hearing is established, the organization of which has no particularities compared to the corresponding offices existing in the ordinary courts.
8.3 Military judicial organization The military judicial offices are divided into prosecuting bodies (Military General Prosecutor's Office at the Supreme Court of Cassation; General Prosecutor's Office at the Military Court of Appeal and 9 Military Prosecutor's Offices at the Military Tribunals) and judging bodies (Military Court of Appeal, 9 Military Courts and Military Surveillance Court).
Law no. 180 of 7 May 1981 made a series of changes to the military judicial system.
The art. 103 of the Constitution attributes, in peacetime, to military courts the exercise of jurisdiction for military crimes committed by members of the Armed Forces.
The current Council - which is the fourth by the founding law - took office on 31 July 2001.
8.1 General information The Minister of Defense has, with respect to the military magistrates and the Council of the Military Judiciary, CMM, the same powers that belong to the Minister of Justice with respect to the Superior Council of the Magistracy (CSM), and the ordinary magistrates.
163


164 Furthermore, it is necessary to keep in mind the workload that resulted from the new code of criminal procedure which introduced (1989) the so-called "accusatory" rite in which the evidence is formed with the cross-examination of the parties, as well as the new institution of the Judge's Offices for preliminary investigations (gip) and of the judge for the preliminary hearing (gup).
This means that if numerically the workload may appear to have decreased, in reality these types of "character" crimes, due to the difficulties of investigations and hearings, determine a much higher work commitment than the previous one.
The judging panel of the Military Court of Appeal is made up of the president of the Court itself or, in case of impediment, by a military magistrate of Cassation or Appeal, acting as president; by two military appellate magistrates, with judge functions; by two soldiers of one of the FF.AA. or of the Guardia di Finanza, of a rank equal to that of the accused and, in any case, not lower than lieutenant colonel, drawn by lot, with the functions of judge.
In fact, if on the one hand it is true that statistically there has been a decrease in the typical crimes committed by enlisted personnel, so-called "absence" crimes (failure to be called up, desertion, etc.), it is equally true that the so-called "absence" crimes have increased. "character", especially some types of crimes such as property crimes against the PA.
The Military Court of Appeal also devolves the powers that art.45 of the military judicial system (RD 9 September 1941, n.1022) attributed to the Supreme Military Court in special composition (military rehabilitation; reinstatement in rank, etc.).
This framework must not, however, lead us to believe - as supported by the Council itself in a recent resolution - that the work and needs of military judicial offices, with the reduction of conscript personnel, are necessarily destined to decrease.
The second level body is the Military Court of Appeal, established with art.3 of law 7.5.1981, n.180, which judges on the appeal lodged against the measures issued by the military courts.
Pursuant to law 180/81, military courts judge with the intervention of the president of the military court, who presides over it or, in case of impediment, of an appellate military magistrate, acting as president; of a military tribunal or appellate magistrate, with the functions of a judge; of a soldier of one of the FF.AA. or of the Guardia di Finanza, of a rank equal to that of the accused and in any case not lower than the rank of officer, chosen by lot, with the functions of judge.
The data relating to the military judicial appellate offices, the surveillance ones and the military general prosecutor's office at the Supreme Court of Cassation highlight how judicial activity is numerically limited and, in any case, tends to decrease. ____________ The first level prosecuting offices, however, in the same reference year, carried out criminal proceedings in approximately
4300 cases, compared to almost 9000 in 1997 (minus 50%).
8.4 Judicial activity: statistical data During the year 2000 - as emerges from the results of a fact-finding investigation promoted by the Military Judiciary Council - the military judicial offices of first instance pronounced 4010 trial sentences (of which 870 plea bargaining), at which must be added to the 1500 sentences rendered by the judges for the preliminary hearing - these figures are almost constant compared to those of recent years.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it In fact, compared to a staff of 103 military magistrates, there are currently 83 presences to which must be added another 13 recently appointed units who are completing the hearing period, upon completion of which they will be placed in the relevant functions.
The aforementioned Court is made up of all the military supervisory magistrates and experts appointed by the CMM, within the categories indicated by art.80, IV paragraph, of law 26.7.1975, n.354 (professionals expert in psychology, service social, pedagogy and psychiatry), as well as among teachers of criminal sciences.
8.5 Judicial staff In this context, the situation of covering the staff of military magistrates is currently quite satisfactory, also taking into account the fact that few retirements are expected in the immediate future.
Then there is the Military Surveillance Court - established by Legislative Decree 27.10.1986, n.700, converted with law 23.12.1986, n.897, following the reorganization of the supervisory bodies of the ordinary jurisdiction - competent to supervise the execution of the penis (fig. 1).
ITALY TABLE


The aforementioned Council, established at the beginning of each two-year period by decree of the Minister, is composed of a military magistrate of the Supreme Court, appointed to higher management functions, who presides over it; a military magistrate acting as an appellate judge; the most senior manager among the managers of the military chancelleries and a manager serving at the General Directorate for Civil Personnel.
For non-judicial staff, law 3.2.1989, n.38 established the Board of Directors at the Ministry of Defense for the staff of the chancelleries and judicial secretariats, which in addition to having the powers provided for by the law regarding personnel, It also carries out the functions of a disciplinary council.
The winning ordinary magistrates, however, frequently reach the seats assigned to them only if they like it and only if in the meantime they have not been able to satisfy their aspirations for transfer within the judicial system of origin.
The requalification procedures for the remaining positions are currently being finalized.
In particular, the competition for access to the military judiciary takes place in two phases, the first of which is reserved for ordinary magistrates, and a subsequent one reserved for graduates. (a) The competition procedure is being finalized for 1 post (b) The competition has been announced for 9 posts (c) The competition has been announced for 12 posts (d) The competition has been announced for 31 posts The Military Judiciary Council, however, has highlighted, for the medium term, the difficulties linked to the particular methods of placing military magistrates into service.
To fill the remaining 7 positions, the competition based on qualifications (reserved for ordinary magistrates) is currently being completed. non-judicial military justice personnel
8.8 Establishment of Military Judicial Police Sections The aforementioned problem (also extended to the unsustainable over-allocation of cars serving the Military Judicial Offices: 63 compared to the 37 envisaged by the DI 06.11 1990), is being examined by a specific Working Group, established at the request of the Minister's Cabinet at the General Staff of Defense (SMD) and including representatives, in addition to the SMD (which presides) and the Minister's Cabinet, also from the Armed Forces General Staff and the CC General Commands. and G. di F., of the General Secretariat of Defense and the Military Judiciary.
As for the competitions, the Administration, after having requested and obtained - during the three-year planning of the personnel needs, pursuant to art. 39, paragraph 1, of law 449/97 - authorization from the Presidency of the Council, has competitions relating to various qualifications were announced during the month of July: n. 9 posts of chancellery officer, n. 12 stationery assistant positions and n. 31 judicial assistant positions. ____________ Currently, if the IV and V functional qualification positions have been completely filled, they are recorded in the other qualifications as vacancies, which however are destined to be filled in the short term: partly through competitive procedures and partly through recourse to requalification procedures. .
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it Consequently, to ensure the functioning of the military judicial chancelleries (burden placed on the CEO pursuant to art. 15 L.
180/1981), only the use of auxiliary civilian personnel will be required.
The new professional model towards which the military instrument is evolving will have as a consequence, in the Armed Forces, both the drastic reduction in the number of "cadres" (officers and non-commissioned officers) and the gradual suspension of the military service. Therefore, in the very near future, the FF.AA. they will be unable to support and deal with the requests of the GM bodies, in particular those located on the outskirts.
As regards non-judicial staff, the current workforce of managers, officials, collaborators and chancellery assistants includes 7 management units, 14 chancellery directors, 26 chancellery officials, 40 chancellery collaborators, 36 judicial assistants and 173 IV and V functional qualification.
8.6 Non-judicial staff (summary table 2)
8.7 Assignment of military personnel A very delicate problem is represented by the assignment of military personnel to support the Military Judicial Offices, personnel which currently (including CC and G of F) approximates 400 units.
This leads to inevitable delays and negative effects on office coverage.
165


also the personnel (U., SU. and Mil.Tr.) assigned to "prisoner surveillance" tasks; • 2 active military prisons, respectively in Rome (Forte Boccea) and S. Maria Capua Vetere (CE); • 3 military prison sections in the "Quadro" position in the Peschiera del Garda (VR), Cagliari and At the moment, military detention needs are met entirely by the Army, through a structure based on: • a Command at Brigadier General level, based in Sulmona; • a recruit training battalion (57th Infantry Battalion "Abruzzi") in the same location, responsible for training
8.9 The Military Penitentiary Organization (OPM – Executive Bodies) At the moment, however, despite the absence of the specific legislative vehicle, the needs reported over the years by the various military prosecutors have sometimes been satisfied by resorting to the assignment, on an actual level only, of the requested personnel belonging to the Carabinieri.
Currently, in fact, due to the promiscuity of military and civilian prisoners, custodial treatments and judicial skills, military supervisory personnel must in fact carry out typical functions of a "maximum security" IPC according to laws and regulations which at the moment are heterogeneous between them, with the assumption by the same of responsibilities typical of civil organisation.
This reality, with increasingly frequent "assignments" of "particular detainees" subjected to typical "maximum security" IPC surveillance, has accentuated the "deviation of employment" of an organization normally dedicated to tasks of an exclusively military nature.
On this point it seems appropriate that an organic discipline be prepared taking into account the peculiar military condition and ensuring the harmonization of the tasks and responsibilities of the PGM of the Corps Commanders with the attributions proposed for the Sections whose establishment can be analyzed in the context of a broader reform of the military criminal justice system.
Adequate solutions related to the: • possible military detention of women are also necessary; • current military prison legislation/regulations, dating back to 1918 and 1943; • decrease in the availability of supervisory and custodian personnel to be employed in military prisons which at the moment is essentially drawn from those in compulsory military service.
The establishment of Military Judicial Police Sections at each Military Prosecutor's Office of the Republic is a need keenly felt by the Military Judicial System; the Council of the Military Judiciary has been the spokesperson for this several times in its plenary deliberations and the military Attomey General of the Republic at the Military Court of Appeal in the periodic report for the inauguration of the judicial year. other members of the PF.
Maria Capua Vetere, where the modemization and expansion works of the accommodation capacity were completed.
This provision will make it possible to fully satisfy the needs of military detention at the headquarters of S. ____________
• Proceeding military and ordinary judicial authority, respectively for other military prisoners and for members of the PF;
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it In this context, the redundancy of the structure appears evident and could be rationalized by identifying a single location where all the aforementioned components can be concentrated, providing for the transfer of the OPM Command from Sulmona to S. Maria Capua Vetere and the contraction of the military prison in Rome to a Section "Painting".
It should be underlined that these needs, already reduced with the removal of "objectors" from military justice (as a result of ruling no. 358/1993 of the Constitutional Court), will be further reduced considering that the types of crimes committed by soldiers detained in military prisons (failure to be called up and desertion) are almost exclusively connected with compulsory military service which is destined to disappear in the short-medium term.
As a result of law 121/1981 (art. 79), members of the Police Force (PF) detained for any crime can also be imprisoned in military prisons, upon request of the interested parties. In the absence of a specific request, FP prisoners are restricted to the "Protected Sections" of civil penal institutions (IPC). These detention tasks of military prisons are verified in their execution by: • Military and ordinary Surveillance Judiciary, respectively for definitive military prisoners and Military prisons are institutionally responsible for the custody of military prisoners for military crimes (Lieutenant Decree
27 October 1918, Royal Decree 306/1943 and art.26 CPMP) who, maintaining their military legal status, continue to be subject to (criminal) laws and (disciplinary) regulations specific to that state, under the jurisdiction of the military judiciary, and receive re-educational-training treatment aimed at promoting their reintegration into the units of the Armed Forces and into the civilian context of society.
Palermo.
The OPM constitutes a sector of activity reporting to the SM of the Army.
166


The term "war" raises scenarios in the collective imagination that we would like to exorcise with the abolition of the word from common language. But the time has come to rationalize the matter and bring the legal situation into line with the factual one.
The suspension always sanctioned by the CPMG Legislator with respect to military forces employed abroad probably has its rationale in factors of a more psychological than legal nature.
It is necessary not only to project ourselves into the medium-long term and try to anticipate the times, but also to revisit options which, due to their shared opportunity, could be introduced, if innovative in the current system, into the legal world.
The profiles that could be addressed concem both the competence of the military judiciary and, in an inseparable connection, the legal system.
The only fixed point remains the jurisdiction of the Military Court of Rome regarding all military crimes committed abroad by members of the deployed contingents.
In this context, so far we have tried to make up for it with intemal instructions and with the so-called "rules of engagement", the violation of which may only be relevant on a disciplinary level. However, given the vastness of the matter, they cannot be considered as solving the problem.
If on the one hand the marked autonomy of this system constitutes the founding reason, on the other hand such a choice may not be entirely coherent and should at least be adequately investigated in order to be confirmed.
Furthermore, a further effect of the choice made by the Legislator is to be found in the inapplicability in military operations abroad of the rules of war law, intemational humanitarian law and those provisions aimed at allowing better protection of our soldiers.
8.10 Considerations The reform plan relating to the Defense Administration, not yet completed, has not yet affected the military judicial administration. The area of military justice has remained almost unchanged over time.
At the same time as the aforementioned provision, the Govemment, given the significant implications of a substantive and procedural nature, also approved a bill containing amendments to the military criminal code of war itself, not limited to the "Enduring-Freedom" operation alone.
However, it was necessary to establish the non-application of the provisions on military war procedure and those conceming the relevant judicial system to this operation. ____________ The solution adopted also results in the impossibility of prosecuting the so-called "war crimes" whose cases are contained in the articles. from 165 to 230 cpmg which at the time was very early on this point compared to the intemational standards in force, but which over time would have required an update in light of the conventions subsequently ratified on the subject by Italy.
If this is the reference rule on the matter, it must be said that up to now the Legislator, on the occasion of the numerous missions abroad that our Armed Forces. were called upon to carry out, he chose to apply only the military penal code of peace.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it This will entail particular criminal protection inherent to the military condition and interest and will allow the application of some rules against the laws and customs of war, i.e. humanitarian law.
Well, it is for these significant and unavoidable purposes that the Govemment has taken charge of the problem and with a decree-law, given the extraordinary need and urgency to issue provisions aimed at regulating Italian participation in the multinational operation called "Enduring-Freedom" against terrorism, has applied the military criminal code of war to the personnel employed.
The provision, establishing the application of the military criminal law of war to all Corps - land, naval and air crews - when they are sent abroad for military actions, allows both the exercise of criminal action against all those typical codified crimes in this law possibly committed by Italian soldiers, and the prosecutability of specific crimes committed against the latter.
For the crews of military ships or military aircraft, subjection to the military criminal law of war begins from the moment in which the destination of the shipment is communicated to them".
It is in the interest of the FF.AA. and operators have an updated reference framework that is certain and compatible with constitutional principles, with ratified intemational conventions and with emerging cases dictated by operational experience. The results can only be entirely positive on a substantive and procedural level.
8.11 Application of the military penal code of peace (and not of war) during military missions abroad – Problematic aspects Art. 9 cpmg, dating back like the peace law to 1941, prescribes that: "Expeditionary forces abroad for military operations are subject to the military criminal law of war, even in peacetime, from the moment in which the crossing the borders of the State and, in the case of an overseas shipment, from the moment the expeditionary force begins to embark.
167


Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it Furthermore, both initiatives are perfectly combined with the need in this sense proposed by the CMM. A more radical and incisive intervention to reform the codes can only be achieved in the appropriate ways and within the necessary timeframes, which, given the complexity of the issues under discussion, is likely to be considered not short. ____________ The legislative initiative thus has the advantage of introducing an updated structure in full compliance with all the interests at stake, ultimately modemizing the matter.
In fact, various substantive provisions of the military criminal code of war appear to conflict with some constitutional principles and others require adaptation to the redefined military system and to the changed factual circumstances.
168


9.5 LOGISTIC SUPPORT POLICY
9.4.3 Aeronautical segment
9.4.3.1 Bureaucratic procedures
9.4.4 Carabinieri segment 9.4.4.1 Supply policy in the Carabinieri 9.4.4.2 Logistics organization of the Carabinieri
9.2 CURRENT SITUATION AND FUTURE PROSPECTS
9.1 LOGISTICS - GENERAL INFORMATION
9.4.2.7 Current situation - ammunition 9.4.2.8 Current situation - materials 9.4.2.9 Logistics chain of repairs/maintenance
9.4.1 Land segment 9.4.2 Naval segment 9.4.2.1
Food 9.4.2.2
Clothing 9.4.2.3
Barracks 9.4.2.4 Fuels and lubricants 9.4.2.5
Vehicles 9.4.2.6 “Outsourced” services
THE MATERIALS
PART IX
9.4 OPERATION POLICY ____________
9.3 POLICY OF INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION IN THE FIELD OF THE TRANSFER OF MATERIALS
9.2.5 Modemization programs in the naval materials sector 9.2.5.1 Below is the current situation of the main modemization programs of the naval instrument 9.2.5.2 Main programs to be launched for the renewal and modemization of the air-naval instrument according to the "minimum" requirements established 9.2.6 Modemization programs in the aeronautical materials sector 9.2.7 Technological innovation programs in the Carabinieri Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
9.6.1.1 Spare parts
9.6.1.2 Ammunition
9.6.2 Naval segment
9.6.3 Aviation segment
9.2.4 Modemization programs in the field of land materials 9.2.4.1 The heavy forces block 9.2.4.2 The medium forces block 9.2.4.3 The light forces block 9.2.4.4 New equipment for the soldier 9.2.4.5 Aircraft component 9.2. 4.6 Anti-air defense 9.2.4.7 In the Command and Control/Communications/Computer sector (C4)
9.2.3.1 SICRAL System
9.2.3.2 Joint Forces Digital Network
9.2.3.3 C4I Defense System
9.2.3.4 The Defense Telematics Network (DIFENET)
9.6 STOCK POLICY 9.6.1 Land segment
9.2.1 Procurement Policy 9.2.2 Modemization programs in the field of materials 9.2.3 Modemization programs in the Command, Control, Communications and Information (C3I) sector 169


with multimodal typology; • balanced and mobile sustainability of forces in all its components;
• accentuated mobility of forces not only in the tactical field, but also and above all at a strategic level mass.
In summary, the new political-military reference framework in which the aforementioned functional and structural changes
in Defense are maturing, postulate a:
9.1 Logistics - General "Logistics" has always represented the essential element for the life and activity of any complex organization and, even more so, for that of Defence. It has the fundamental purpose of placing operational forces in a position to conduct and complete the missions entrusted to them. As is known, the strategic security framework in Europe and around the world has changed considerably in recent times. This change has led most countries, particularly those belonging to NATO, to redefine their role and tasks. In this regard, the Atlantic Alliance has developed a new strategic concept based on the concept of "Collective Defense and Security". Consistent with this renewed approach, NATO has already started a process of intemal structural adaptation of its military organization to make it more responsive to new scenarios, to give due importance, within the Alliance, to the European Security and Defense Identity (ESDI ) and for the acquisition of better operational capabilities, to respond to the new tasks and missions related to crisis management and the risks of proliferation of weapons of destruction of In particular, for the Navy there is a need to have a support tool that allows it to continuously maintain, at the usual levels of operational readiness, various Force complexes (from the single unit, to air-naval power projection groups, mine clearance, of amphibious intervention, of escorts and protection, of advanced covert surveillance, etc.) deployed anywhere in intemational waters with very short notice, very high technical-logistical autonomy and without the need for theater bases.
9.7 MILITARY HEALTH POLICY 9.8 MOVEMENT
AND TRANSPORT POLICY 9.9 SUPPLY POLICY 9.10
CLOTHING AND EQUIPMENT POLICY
9.6.3.1 Ammunition and fuel stocks 9.6.3.2
Commissariat 9.6.3.3 The Mobile Support Department It is therefore necessary to seek the prerequisites for a common direction on the matter which, while respecting the peculiar employment philosophy of each Armed Force, allows efforts to converge for the optimal achievement of the objectives. On this basis, it is therefore important that the military instrument has "finalized logistics", in other words aimed at supporting the projection of forces outside the area, a logistics which, through the synergistic use of information, materials, healthcare and transport, makes the mobility and supply of operational units possible in a timely, operationally optimal manner and with a favorable cost-effectiveness ratio. ____________ It will therefore be necessary to substantiate the fundamental principles of redevelopment of the military instrument, such as: timeliness, deployment, integrability, interoperability and sustainability. All this inevitably presupposes a radical change in those logistical concepts that have govemed the sector up to now, based on territoriality and on a certain rigidity and burdensomeness due to the traditional concept of material storage with all the related organizational and technical-administrative. In this context, it has therefore become imperative to radically review the organizational framework of logistics, with particular attention to Logistics Planning, which must be conducted with a joint vision of the inter-forces, seeking every possible integration between the Armed Forces aimed at optimizing the available resources.
It follows that, at a national level, the choices and structural adaptations must be compatible and coherent with the European and Atlantic ones within a framework of full integration and interoperability with the Armed Forces of the allied countries.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it “collective responsibility”.
• rapid, flexible and interoperable logistical support; • adequate coordination with other organizations such as the EU and the United Nations; • the Alliance's best global logistics arrangement with a vision based on the principle of In particular, as regards "Logistics", this structural adaptation process involves:
170


171
COSTS OF SOME OF THE MAIN EQUIPMENT, SYSTEMS AND WEAPONS
MATERIAL TABLES harmonize the national reality with NATO/EU regulations; • policy aimed at a fair and more effective interaction between the Armed Forces and the civilian context;
• creation of a common logistics management IT platform (also including the healthcare segment) such as to allow the exchange of information and coordination between the entities
• review of responsibilities and skills regarding Host Nation Support (HNS), in order to
COSTS OF SOME OF THE MAJOR WEAPON SYSTEMS
• military healthcare whose activities must be given particular emphasis, through the inter-force sharing of healthcare resources;
• stronger standardization policy in order to improve cooperation and cost-effectiveness in the provision of logistical support to forces, particularly in the multinational context;
• different policy in the management of stocks which avoids the immobilization of materials and capital especially for those with advanced technology, pursuing uniformity of direction among the Armed Forces, starting with commonly used materials;
To understand the financial burden of the Armed Forces' weapon systems, the unit costs of the main weapons, vehicles and ammunition are shown below. ____________ In essence, mobility, extemal projection capacity and logistical sustainability, specifically the "modemization of our Armed Forces", are still limited. The gap that exists between us and other European countries is, more than a technological quality gap in the strict sense, a gap of depth, that is, of size, intensity and sustainability over time of the operational interventions that we can carry out. It is a gap substantially attributable to the aforementioned undercapitalization of our military instrument, i.e. to an incorrect and unsustainable size/resources ratio. limited nature of the military instrument has not found compensation in the allocations of funds necessary for the maintenance and modemization of the materials of the entire instrument. That is, the Italian Armed Forces ultimately lack the depth to sustain over time even limited efforts or efforts in differentiated theaters unless there is a suitable increase in the sector of the budget dedicated to materials.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it In this context, the Italian Defense is proceeding with the identification of a common strategy of "research", "acquisition" and "sharing", also giving its convinced adhesion to all intemational cooperation initiatives in this area. As an immediate consequence, the development of the so-called Defense Capability Initiative (DCI) was introduced, in parallel with force planning, aimed at giving impetus and incisiveness to the process of renewal and modemization of the Allied military instruments.
9.2 Current situation and future prospects The second half of the 1990s saw a more accentuated projection of the military instrument for foreign policy issues, with the assumption of growing responsibility in the Mediterranean area and also in extra-Mediterranean areas or areas geostrategically connected to them , and with a primary political-military role in the crisis of the Balkan area.
Consequently, an active, efficient and long-term military participation, which caused a strong wear and tear of "materials". In this regard, the most significant comparison can only be translated into terms of comparison between the operational capabilities provided in relation to the resources - always limited - invested and which are invested to achieve them. In practice, the succession of operations conducted by one party It should be specified that these initiatives concem and will concem various aspects of the technical and political activity of Defense such as: "the definition of needs", "the setting of programs", "the acquisition process", "industrial cooperation" and "the participation of other countries", ultimately a medium/long term "General Planning" which will require the involvement of the entire military apparatus. The results of this policy, given the resources available, will only be achievable by eliminating waste, overlapping areas and redundancies, rationalizing and optimizing the resources available at FF.AA level.
OF THE AIR FORCE national and between these and/or NATO/Intemational ones, through the timely and precise sharing of logistical information.
AND ARMY AMMUNITION


including the transportability aspect. (Combined);
• transition from "just in case" consumption logistics, i.e. based on the analysis of "potential" needs, with consequent onerous and unusable accumulations of materials to deal with any type of hypothesized emergency, to "just in case" consumption logistics time”, i.e. based on the principle of an accurate preventive planning and programming activity, based on the determination of actual needs, which provides what is needed, at the same time minimizing the storage of stocks.
In this framework, the procurement policy must operate according to the needs related to safety, adapting to the priorities indicated by the Ministerial Directive. The Defense, in fact, abandoning the old policy which encouraged the purchase of materials produced domestically, resorting to acquisition abroad only in case of necessity and absolute economic convenience, has long directed its action towards constant intemational market research. With regard to the procurement of materials relating to "Logistics", i.e. materials/services relating to the technical-logistical support of operational units, the Defense intends to pursue a procurement policy based on the following criteria: • accentuated use of out-sourcing on a of convenience-necessity; • transfer to the Technical-Operational Area of all maintenance activities - including supply - in compliance with the principle that, as these are logistical activities dedicated to the support of operational units, these must necessarily be the responsibility of the Armed Forces;
The characteristics to which these systems must respond can be summarized as:
• interoperability, i.e. the ability to exchange services at joint (Joint) and multinational level
9.2.3 Modemization program in the Command, Control, Communications and Information (C3I) sector
9.2.1 Supply Policy The geo-political evolution is accentuating the concept of the centrality of security and has enhanced its globality in intemational terms.
And it is precisely in this direction that the Ministry of Defense is concentrating its efforts through constant political action for a profound reform of the Armed Forces and in particular towards the "Logistics" area, where the sectors fundamentals of the same: • supplies; • modemization programs in the field of materials; • intemational cooperation in the field of materials transfer; • operation; • logistical support;
• stocks; • Military Healthcare; • Movements and Transport; • provisions, clothing and equipment.
• greater tactical mobility on the ground and increased precision firepower; • multidimensional protection of forces. This presupposes both an increased air defense capability and more flexible and timely air-tactical support as a means of deterrence, pressure, support and protection of forces deployed in theaters across the border. ____________
• higher mobility to be achieved through increased air and sea transport capacity of men and vehicles, strengthening dedicated military air and sea transport, also resorting, if necessary, to the commercial sector; real and with a wider geographical coverage, both at a strategic and tactical level;
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
They are:
• Within this framework, the Defense is in the process of creating a set of systems designed to respond to joint strategic needs, characterized by full integration with the specific FA systems.
• significant strengthening of C3I's capabilities which will have to be more effective, available on time The lines of action along which the Defense is moving, to modemize the materials of our Armed Forces, can be
summarized as follows:
• flexibility, i.e. ability to rapidly reconfigure in relation to the evolving operational situation,
9.2.2 Modemization programs in the field of materials 172


• on the one hand, the commander in the field needs an increasingly strong and updated awareness of the operational situation, in order to be able to promptly plan targeted, low-risk and "surgical" actions; • on the other hand, a widespread diffusion of Command and Control tools is necessary, since the action carried out by even the most basic tactical grouping (naval unit, patrol, aircraft) is likely to provoke reactions and consequences which, going beyond the simple context tactical in which they developed, they can take on strategic and political value.
The two facts above have a considerable impact on C3I systems: • • Added to this is an ever-increasing sensitivity of Westem public opinions towards the costs associated with military operations.
Recent intemational events, as well as the practical experiences achieved in the last decade, demonstrate that military operations are increasingly oriented towards typologies different from that of classic conflict. “Unconventional” conflicts, the
fight against intemational terrorism, peace keeping actions, peace enforcing, civilian evacuation, disaster relief, etc. have taken on, and will probably take on in the future, an ever greater significance.
The Defense Command and Control system (C4I Difesa), The SICRAL satellite communications system, • The Joint Numerical Network (RNI), However, as happens in the civil sector, communications requirements also increase exponentially over time in the military sector and, on the application front, new software chases and stimulates hardware innovation at the same time.
Defense is already moving along these lines and, in programmatic terms, financial resources have already been allocated to start preparatory studies for the modemization of transport systems (SICRAL and RNI). As regards the "applications" sector, since it is mainly a product of commercial origin, a realistic development framework can only refer to the evolution of the products (HW and ____________ With the progressive entry into service of the above-mentioned systems, the Defense will have an effective tool for the exercise of Command and Control in the various hypothesized operational situations.
C4I Difesa and DIFENET belong to the applications sector and carry out, respectively, the fusion of data coming from the Command and Control systems of the individual Armed Forces . (as well as operational web and email services), and the INTRANET of the DEFENSE sector, in compliance, among other things, with specific legal provisions. Both systems obviously see SICRAL and RNI as the preferential transport systems.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The use of INTERNET technologies, associated with broadband transmission systems, can be an answer to this requirement.
Furthermore, the ever-increasing amount of information to be transmitted, together with the need for global coverage, presupposes the opportunity to complement typically military systems with dual and/or commercial systems, capable of ensuring the satisfaction of needs that are not strictly operational or cover particular geographical areas outside the footprint of military satellites.
The second need that must be satisfied by future communications systems will therefore be that of making a large amount of information available to the operational user in times close to reality and with a man/machine interface that is as user friendly as possible.
SICRAL and RNI pertain to the transport of information: the first with a prevalent strategic connotation (out-of-area operations, mobile users), the second with a prevalent infrastructural connotation (connections between the Command centers located on the national territory). The two systems are perfectly integrated with each other, to the point that one can be considered an extension of the other, thus achieving interoperability at joint force level. Furthermore, the two systems can accept/provide services from/to similar systems of allied countries, thus responding to the principle of multinational interoperability.
All the aforementioned systems integrate joint forces needs at different levels and within the limits of the particular operational needs for which they were conceived. In particular:
The Commander of the near future will therefore need increasingly sophisticated and, above all, increasingly widespread automated Command and Control systems among the forces under his control. To manage tomorrow's operations, there will be an increasingly need to exchange information (operational, intelligence, logistical, medical, media, staff well-being, etc.) with command centers which will very often be located in areas remote from the operating area. 'operations.
• The Defense telematics network (DIFENET).
173


174 satellite. joint exercises. It is based on: • a satellite segment in geostationary orbit, operating in three frequency bands; • a military Management and Control Center located near Rome, responsible for both the control of the satellite and the configuration and implementation of the feasible communications networks; • an initial set of 107 user terminals of different types (fixed, transportable, naval, avionics, vehicular, "manpack").
9.2.3.4 The Defense telematics network (DIFENET) With a rather small initial investment (around 180 m Euros equal to 350 million) it was created, within the FF.AA. a first prototype.
Once the operational validity of the identified solution has been verified, the industry (ALENIAMARCONI Systems) will be given a mandate to proceed with the engineering of the prototype, through a multi-year development program which will allow this system to be available by 2003. The overall associated cost amounts to approximately 18 million euros (36 billion). its reconfigurability in case of failures; • a series of nodal centers located throughout the national territory; • an interconnection (gateway) to the SICRAL system, which ensures the flow of communications to/from the It is a satellite communications system intended to provide transmission support for ed operations It is a radio link communications system intended to meet the infrastructural needs of the Army, Navy, Air Force and Carabinieri on national territory. It consists of: • a central network control center which allows the control of the efficiency of the entire network and the
9.2.3.1 SICRAL system operational at joint force level (Common Operational Picture); • sharing of e-mail and WEB services at an inter-force level.
SW) available on the market and the related NATO trends, having, however, to ensure the direct interoperability of the systems.
The main characteristics of these systems are briefly described below.
9.2.3.2 Joint force numerical network
• the fusion of data coming from the Command and Control systems of the Army (SIACCON), Navy (LEONARDO) and Air Force (SICCAM), in such a way as to represent the data of the situation The ever-increasing joint nature that characterizes today's military operations has highlighted the need for the Defense to create
an IT system that would allow: ____________ The SICRAL company, the first of its kind in Italy, constitutes a milestone in the military communications sector. It is in fact clear that since 7 February 2001 the availability of satellite communications has become an indispensable requirement for Defense, a prerequisite for the correct exercise of the Command and Control of national forces. This means that study activities aimed at guaranteeing the continuity of the service even after 2011 have already been started. Obviously the operational experience of use in the field, the emerging communications needs and the foreseeable developments of technology in the next decade will constitute an element fundamental to such studies.
The overall cost of the company was approximately 465 million euros (900 billion).
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
9.2.3.3 C4I Defense System The project is expected to be completed by 2004, with a global cost of approximately 155 million (300 billion).
The satellite was launched on 7 February 2001 from the Kourou test range (European Ariane consortium) and it was possible to establish the first operational links since April 2001. The operational life of the satellite is estimated at 10 years.
SICRAL was created almost entirely with Italian technology by a consortium of companies (Alenia Spazio, Telespazio and Fiat Avio), supported by Marconi Mobile for the creation of the user terminals.
Activities are currently underway to provide the Joint Forces Numerical Network with greater flexibility of use through the creation of altemative routes (meshing) and integration with fiber optic sections.
The joint digital network was created by the Marte consortium (MARCONITE-TELETTRA), exploiting and expanding the infrastructure of a previous analogue network. It allows a bidirectional flow of 34 Mbs.
The system allows the creation of high-capacity traffic flows capable of covering military needs throughout the satellite's visibility area which extends from the eastem coasts of the American continent to beyond India.


175 • •
• represents the reference basis for the creation of interoperability of telematic networks in The current situation in the field of materials and equipment sees the FA committed, in the short and medium term (next decade), to adapting them to the current operational standards of the main European armies, while in the long term (next decade) it is expected the creation of a series of programs with high technological value which will allow the Army to make a real "leap forward", in particular in the "strategic" sectors of Command and Control, communications, surveillance of maneuver space, research and acquisition of targets and electronic warfare.
They are associated with other positive advantages, such as the creation of integrated logistical support shared with other nations and the retum of know-how for the Italian defense industry.
RUPA is the most important intersectoral project pursued by AIPA for the creation of a telematic network in which all public administrations are integrated with each other through the services offered (electronic mail, file transfer, access to news, virtual terminal and INTERNET ). This network requires that each Administration must "approach" it with its own "domain", understood as the set of hardware resources (computers, networks, etc.) and software (applications and data) that belong to the same organization.
The need to have a telematic network that would allow the connection between the computers and the networks of the Defense Administration regardless of their geographical location and the operating system of the various IT systems, was already strongly felt by the Armed Forces. It became unavoidable when the problem of connecting the Defense Administration to the Unitary Network of Public Administration (RUPA) had to be addressed in compliance with the provisions of the law on the matter. the containment of high research and development costs, currently sustainable only through their distribution between several countries; maintaining maximum interoperability with the systems of the allied armies. ____________
9.2.4 Modemization programs in the land materials sector In the field of modemization of weapon systems, for several years the Army has oriented its strategic choices towards the objective of intemational cooperation. This is essentially due to two reasons:
DIFENET, in the configuration outlined above, will be operational by 2003 with a spending commitment of approximately
3 million euros (6 billion).
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it In the long term, we will proceed with the progressive replacement of all vehicles in the category with a series of versions (Combat, Command, Support, etc.) centered on a common platform in order to have homogeneous units in terms of mobility, but varied in capacity. As regards the type of platform, at the current stage we are thinking of a tracked version, due to the advantages in terms of tactical mobility, but technological evolution could lead us to also lean towards a wheeled version.
9.2.4.1 The blockade of heavy forces is currently focused on "ARIETE" and "LEOPARD 1 A5" tanks, on combat vehicles derived from the well-known M 113 and the M 109 self-propelled howitzer. A critical situation, therefore, which could achieve a clear improvement when the VCC “DARDO” (with 25 mm cannon and long-range anti-tank missiles) and the German self-propelled artillery PZH 2000 will be introduced. It is a concrete technological leap, which will be further enhanced by the application, up to the single medium, of tactical Command and Control and Navigation systems, real force multipliers.
• it is structured, from the point of view of network architecture, so that each user body of the network retains responsibility for the design, implementation and management of its own information systems, while adhering, however, to the technical rules indicated in the DIFENET document ; • through a "DIFENET Management Center" (CGD) the management, administration and configuration control of the network is ensured, as well as the interoperability service between the various user bodies of the network itself is made possible.
• is intended to support traffic of unclassified data of an administrative nature, initially excluding the possibility of processing classified data or data connected to the conduct of operations. It, however, is designed to constitute the backbone for future developments towards a national geographic network to be used also for operational uses and classified information;
Below is a quick mention of the main investment programs underway or soon to be launched, referring to the type of forces (heavy, medium and light) to be prepared:
AD area and to set up the Defense INTRANET;
In summary, DIFENET performs the following functions:


To this range of materials is added the new equipment for the soldier, foreseen with a 9.2.4.4 program called "Fighter of 2000", to be finalized in the short-medium term. This is a set
9.2.4.2 The block of medium forces, the FA units are at the top of the European level, thanks to the armored vehicle of Italian production "CENTAURO", already acquired by the Spanish army and currently being evaluated by the US and Brazilian armies. In the short term (presumably from 2003) it will be joined by a variant for personal transport, the VBC 8x8, equipped with the same turret as the "DARDO", as well as by a light armored vehicle VBL 4x4 (already being acquired) and a howitzer ultralight ULH 155/39 (as of 2004), also adopted for light forces and developed jointly with the United States and the United Kingdom. Also in this case, the vehicles currently in service or introduced in the short term will be replaced, after 2020 and at the end of their operational life, by a combat system structured on a common rotated platform.
These programs include a Command and Control system (SIACCON) capable of processing, analyzing and merging the information acquired by the sensors and conveyed by the transmission network, in order to support the Commanders of the various organizational levels in their decision-making process. This Command and Control system will refer to a standard data model to manage symbology and standardized messaging within NATO. They will ensure the availability of processing and communication terminals with integrated localization, identification and security functions. Furthermore, the sensors necessary for electronic warfare and battlefield surveillance activities are foreseen. integrated equipment and systems of particular relevance for light forces, due to the emphasis placed on the individual
fighter, which will allow them to operate by enhancing characteristics such as protection, lethality, availability of information and integration with the other components of the unit.
9.2.4.3 The light forces block (Alpine units, paratroopers and aircraft) will be equipped in the next few years with the VBL 4x4 and 6x6 (currently being supplied), with the BV 206 high mobility vehicles (currently being supplied) and with the VTLM multi-role light tactical vehicles (starting from 2003). Furthermore, the 105/14 light howitzers, no longer meeting the operational requirements deriving from modem employment scenarios, will be replaced by the aforementioned ULH 155/39 ultralight howitzer and the 120 heavy rifled mortar.
With regard to these programs and the others necessary to provide the IE with a balanced instrument in all its components, it is considered necessary to respect the implementation times, and in particular the allocation of the funds foreseen in the current financial programming of the investment. In particular, in this program some fundamental programs on which the implementation of the aforementioned adaptation of the operational component to the standard of the other European armies is based are contemplated as "without financial coverage", according to the convergence parameters identified in the NATO Defense Capabilities Initiative.
In particular, these are the following programs: • Heavy forces: o “DARDO” Armored Combat Vehicle, 2nd phase, corresponding to 100 vehicles. Please note that units for which this weapon system is intended are currently equipped with derivative versions
9.2.4.5 Another sector of excellence is that of the aircraft component, where substantial improvements are envisaged for the A 129 "MANGUSTA" attack helicopters through the installation of air-to-air weapons and a deployable cannon, as well as - in the future - a new engine. Furthermore, the transport component will see the introduction (starting from 2004) of the NH 90 multi-role helicopter and the ESC multi-role support and combat helicopter. mm.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it A further sector is represented by programs connected with anti-aircraft defence, whose 9.2.4.6 main program is represented by the FSAF/SAMP-T missile system, intended to replace the current HAWK medium-range missile system. ____________ 9.2.4.7Finally, decisive qualitative improvements will be made in the Command and Control/Communications/ Computer (C4) sector which is gaining increasing importance in the intemational field. The programs of the entire sector, to which it will be necessary to give adequate priority, are aimed at the digitalisation of the maneuver space in its terrestrial component, extended to the "third dimension" and enlarged to the "electromagnetic spectrum". They are based on the development of the digitalisation of operational units and on the visualization of the battlefield, brought both to the combat platform and to the individual fighter, and will allow achieving an effective degree of interoperability with the armies of the major European countries, in the perspective of the establishment of the “Division for Europe”.
176


Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it Below is a summary with the expected completion times expressed in billions of lire: o complexes for the transport of armored vehicles (156 vehicles, 136 billion), indispensable for the projection of armored contingents over strategic distances and for the optimal mass use of the very small armored component of the Armed Forces; RISTA-EW: development and acquisition of the aforementioned PUMA RSTA multisensor platform (50 vehicles, 182 billion) and of the radar for battlefield surveillance (22 examples, 35 billion);
Artillery: development and industrialization of the POLYPHEM system (220 billion), development and production of the SAMP-T area anti-aircraft defense system (878 billion) and procurement of G-MLRS ammunition (435 billion); C4: completion of the CATRIN system (317 billion) and digitalisation of the maneuvering space, with particular reference to the C2 system and navigation for SICCONA armored/armored formations (170 billion).
In this context and despite the long-standing pursuit of every synergy with the allied Nations, in an attempt to contain acquisition and management costs, the replacement of the naval units which will have to be removed due to age in the coming years (one cruiser, four frigates Lupo Class, two Audace Class Fighters and, in the future, eight Maestrale Class Frigates) will not be possible in congruent times, resulting in a progressive deep decline in the consistency of the operational line.
The replacement of the Frigates, which constitute the backbone of the Fleet, is a vital problem that cannot be postponed any further since, beyond a certain time limit, even the interventions to extend the life of the Units in line become too onerous to manage and in any case do not cost/ effective due to general technological obsolescence. Consequently, the Navy will be weakened precisely in the operational lines that are crucial in guaranteeing adequate flexibility of use for projection, presence and support operations for the joint operational instrument in distant areas, not capable of ensuring • from the M-113, inadequate in terms of mobility, protection and firepower to cooperate with the ARIETE tanks in the modem operational environment; or rescue wagons for the Ariete tank, to be created in the form of new vehicles (based on the ARIETE hull) or for the modemization of the current LEOPARD rescue wagons (30 vehicles, 201 billion), as well as the rescue version of the VBC 8x8 (38 vehicles, 130 billion);
Furthermore, it is worth underlining that the completion of the programs currently included in the investment planning for the period 2002-2010 does not allow obtaining a result that is completely in line with the real needs of the Armed Forces. In fact, to adapt the combat capabilities of the IE to European and DCI standards, it would be necessary to implement a series of programs that have not yet been launched and for which additional resources would be needed for an amount equal to approximately 3,000 billion. Among these , in particular, include the provision of total night vision capability to the entire range of forces (currently this is only foreseen for a portion of personnel), the acquisition of 3rd generation anti-tank systems in a shorter timeframe ( 5 - 7 years instead of the current 13), the replacement of the materials of two Heavy Field Artillery Regiments (currently equipped with FH-70s), the acquisition of artillery systems for Deep Operations (ATACMS) and the reduction of time for the updating of the Engineers' materials, necessary for carrying out the multiple tasks carried out by this type of force in the context of peace support operations. • If we take 2010 as a reference, we realize that in a decade the Fleet will find itself in a condition of critical obsolescence: apart from the age of the most recent Units (Garibaldi 25 years, De La Penne and Mimbelli 20 years), the age of the frigates in line will fluctuate between 25 and 30 years. ____________
9.2.5 Modemization programs in the naval materials sector The Armed Forces have long been faced with the increasingly pressing problem of recovering the delay accumulated by the replacement program for naval and underwater units in service. Despite the efforts made and underway to support the modemization and renewal of the operational tool, seeking every possible management economy, evidenced - with reference to the EF 2001 - by the contribution to the investment of resources equal to 37.5% of the entire budget allocation, the gap between needs and available resources is such that the levels of consistency of the means envisaged by the joint planning project cannot be achieved in the assumed times. •
MAIN PROGRAMS FOR MODERNIZATION OF THE LAND SEGMENT 177


• Acquisition of an ELETTRA Multipurpose Support Unit, equipped with strong SIGINT capabilities
• Development and acquisition, in cooperation with France, of 2 ORIZZONTE anti-aircraft frigates (total cost of the program: 2,795 billion; expected delivery: 2007-2009). • Acquisition of 4 1500 t patrol boats. COMMANDER CIGALA FULGOSI class, for surveillance needs of the Mediterranean basin (total cost of the program: 680 billion; expected delivery: 2003). area of operational Naval Groups; to the fourth amphibious unit to achieve the full handling and landing potential of the San Marco Regiment;
• four additional AV-8B aircraft for the completion of the line structured on 22 machines;
Air assets • Acquisition, in cooperation with the United Kingdom, of 16 EH-101 helicopters and related logistical support, of which 8 configured for anti-ship and anti-submarine roles, 4 for distant waming and aerial surveillance tasks of naval training and 4 for transport operational and logistical (total cost of the program: 1,800 billion; expected delivery: by 2005). of the program: 31 billion; expected completion: 2002).
But the effects of the insufficiency of resources also reverberate on the concrete possibility of planning those companies - already tentatively included in the Integrated Planning - relating to acquisitions strictly intended to maintain the minimum levels expected. We are referring, in particular: to the second two U-212A boats, which are expected to come online in 2011 and 2014 at the same time as the retirement of two Sauro Class 2nd Series units; to the additional 2 Orizzonte Units in anticipation of the end of the technical-operational life of the 2 De La Penne Class Units, so as to have at least 4 Units with strong AAW capabilities for the protection of communications and flexibility of configuration of use of the supplied aircraft as well as transport capacity of a portion of vehicles and troops of the San Marco Regiment (total cost of the program: 2,250 billion; expected delivery: 2008).
Naval vessels • Acquisition of the aircraft carrier ANDREA DORIA, equipped with high command, control and In summary, it is necessary to start the renewal program of the Frigate line by 2003, to replace the four Lupo Class (decommissioned by 2003, of which the first 2 decommissioned in 2001) and the eight Maestrale Class, in such a way as to provide the entry online of 10 new units starting from 2008 with the completion of the program projected no later than 2015, when the most recent Maestrale class units will have long since exceeded 30 years of technical-operational life.
• Modemization of the command and control and combat systems of the 3rd and 4th series SAURO class submarines (total cost of the program: 300 billion; expected completion: 2004). • Mid-life modemization of the San Giorgio/San Giusto class amphibious naval units (total cost congruently the air-naval potential and the homogeneous operational capabilities required to carry out institutional tasks. • program: 300 billion; expected completion: 2004).
• Mid-life modemization of SAURO class 3rd series submarines (total cost of
9.2.5.1 Below is the situation of the main naval modemization programs already started ____________ to the missile equipment connected with the new medium-range and short-range PAAMS and FSAF systems expected to be installed on all new naval constructions.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it 212A (total cost of the program: 1,750 billion; expected delivery: 2006).
• Development and acquisition, in cooperation with Germany, of 2 new generation U-submarines • 50; expected completion: 2006). • (total cost of the program: 139 billion; expected completion: 2004).
• Extension of the operational life of the AB-212 and SH-3D helicopters (total program cost: billion
• Industrialization and acquisition, in cooperation with France, Germany and the Netherlands, of 56 NH-90 helicopters and related logistical support, of which 46 configured for anti-ship and anti-submarine roles and
10 for operational and logistical transport (total cost of the program: 3,404 billion ; expected completion: beyond 2015). • 178


179 total program: 320 billion; expected completion: beyond 2015).
Amphibious and Special Forces
• Modemization and strengthening of the vehicles of the Amphibious Component and the Special Forces (cost
• Development of a new generation heavy torpedo (total program cost: 237 billion; expected completion: 2012. • Development, in cooperation with Germany, of a new torpedo countermeasures system for U-212A submarines (total program cost : 10 billion; expected completion: 2005-2006. • Acquisition of MU-90 torpedoes (total cost of the program: 544 billion; expected completion: 2007). • Acquisition of conventional and missile armament for the AV-8B aircraft (total cost of 320; expected completion: 2009).
• Acquisition of 9 new generation mine countermeasures units (estimated cost of the program: 2,640 billion; expected completion: beyond 2015). • Acquisition of the 4th Amphibious Unit (LPD) (estimated program cost: 450 billion; expected completion: 2011). • Acquisition of 1 Minehunter Support Unit (MCCS), to replace the “Alpino” (estimated cost: billion
• Creation of on-board systems for command and control (total cost of the program: 170 billion). • Development and acquisition of the Link 22 – NILE system (total cost of the program: 82 billion). • Development and acquisition of the MIDS-LVT system (total cost of the program: 20 billion).
• Industrialization and acquisition of the MILAS anti-submarine missile weapon system, intended to be installed on the DURAND DE LA PENNE class destroyers (total cost of the program: 75 billion; expected delivery:
2003). • Development and acquisition, in cooperation with France, of the soft-kill system for the anti-torpedo defense of SLAT naval units, suitable for being embarked on a vast type of surface unit (total cost of the program: 70 billion; expected completion:
2007).
48 billion).
• Development and acquisition, in cooperation with France, of the SAAM/IT short-range surface-to-air missile system (total program cost: 1,740 billion; expected completion: 2015). • Development and acquisition, in cooperation with France and the United Kingdom, of the PAAMS medium-range surface-to-air missile systems for the Orizzonte frigates, including logistical support and ammunition (total program cost: 1,510 billion; expected completion: 2014 ). • Technological upgrade of the TESEO surface-to-surface missile system (total cost of entry into service: 2015).
Naval weapons and weapons systems
• Creation of a command and control system for amphibious combat (total cost of the program:
• Acquisition of 2 U-212A submarines (2nd series) (estimated cost of the program: 1,750 billion; expected
• Acquisition of 10 new generation frigates, to replace the Lupo and Maestrale class frigates (estimated cost of the program: 11,000 billion; expected entry into service: beyond 2015). ____________ total of the program: 250 billion).
Expected to be completed beyond 2015:
• Creation of the MCCIS strategic command and control system and a coastal radar network (cost Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it expected entry into service: 2015).
Naval assets • Acquisition of 2 ORIZZONTE anti-aircraft frigates (2nd series) (estimated cost of the program: 2,200 billion; program: 123 billion; expected completion: 2011).
9.2.5.2 Main programs to be launched for the renewal and modemization of the air-naval facility according to the "minimum" requirements established program: 86 billion; expected completion: 2015).
C4I systems


180
9.2.6 Modemization programs in the aeronautical materials sector Modemization programs in the aeronautical materials sector start from the operational life of the weapon systems illustrated by the following graph, from the lessons leamed from recent operational experiences and from new policy lines dictated by the Defense General Staff.
2009).
SHADOW), precision drop armament, laser or satellite guided, with all-weather capability (JDAM and PAWEAY III programs), VSHORAD (Very Short) point anti-aircraft defense system Operations); priorities in this field assume "stand off" armament (STORM program 2009).
IN THE NAVAL MATERIALS AND ARMAMENTS SECTOR
MAIN RENEWAL AND MODERNIZATION PROGRAMS
• Acquisition of 1 Submersible Rescue Unit (estimated cost: 300 billion; expected completion:
• completion of the acquisition of defensive and offensive armament adequate to credibly substantiate the commitments, both undertaken and foreseeable, even in "out of area" contexts and PSO (Peace Support
• Acquisition of 1 Special Forces Support Unit (estimated cost: 195 billion; expected completion:
Below is a summary with the expected completion times and costs expressed in billions of lire. (Maritime Patrol Aircraft) to replace the current Atlantic aircraft;
• increase in maritime surveillance capabilities through the acquisition of MPA type aircraft ____________ program: 200 billion; expected completion: 2011).
Naval weapons and weapon systems • Acquisition of PAAMS and SAAM/IT systems with related missiles and logistical supports (estimated cost of Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it replace the current B-707s);
• increase in air transport capacity through the acquisition, already underway, of n. 22 C-130J aircraft (intended to replace the current C-130H), of n. 12 C-27Js (intended to replace G-222s); • increase in-flight refueling capacity through the acquisition of n. 4 B-767s (destined for
390 billion; expected completion: 2011).
Datalink type LINK-16);
• increase in national air defense capacity through the acquisition of a distant threat sighting capability, even at low altitudes, based on the acquisition of "early waming" type aircraft;
Aircraft • Acquisition of 4 STO/VL (Short Take Off / Vertical Landing) aircraft (estimated cost of the program:
Therefore, particular attention will be paid in the four-year period 2002-2005 to the following aspects:
• increase in the survivability of aerotactic and transport aircraft through an adequate provision of self-protection equipment; • continuation of the modemization of the integrated, automated and real-time C2 (Command and Control) component, both joint forces and within the Alliance (ACCS, SICCAM, Range Air Defense) based on rapid-fire guns and shoulder-fired missiles and medium and long-range active air/air armament (METEOR and IRIS-T programmes);
• Mid-life modemization of the GARIBALDI aircraft carrier (estimated program cost: 300 billion; expected completion: 2010). • Mid-life modemization of the DURAND DE LA PENNE fighters, the MAESTRALE frigates and the GAETA minehunters (estimated cost of the program: 1,100 billion; expected completion: 2006-2009).
Weapon System Operational Life


181
MAIN MODERNIZATION PROGRAMS
• participation in the intemational program for the development of a ground attack aircraft e In particular, before the entry into service of the MEADS system (scheduled for 2012), the FA will not have an adequate surface-to-air system for area defense, as the current NIKE system, conceived in the 1950s , has an extremely limited operational value nor will it be possible to seek an "interim" solution with the current availability of financial resources.
Furthermore, it should be underlined that the start and/or completion of some programs is subject to the actual availability of financing ensured by the Ministry of Productive Activities (MAP). the acquisition of a reconnaissance capability based on electro-optical sensors and radar;
Achieving the objectives outlined requires the availability of funds, which is currently not guaranteed, without which some areas will be penalised.
• modemization of the TORNADO and AM-X aerotactic lines, including in this intervention At the same time, some applications for electronic document archiving are at an advanced stage of planning using the IT protocol and digital signature. The computerized "Memorial" of the service will be associated with these creations (a software combined with a vector cartography of the territory
• modemization of piloted air defense through the creation of an "interim" solution based on the F-16 aircraft and the progressive introduction into service of the EF-2000 (Typhoon) aircraft, replacing the F-104 aircraft in service since the early 1960s ;
• modemization of the Combat-SAR helicopter component through the updating of existing vehicles and the acquisition of a new carrier destined to enter service at the end of the decade.
The "intranet" network is already underway with the preparation of LAN networks down to the lowest order levels, and the related strengthening of personal computers, printers, scanners and video projectors, as well as the installation of network servers and the activation of functional connections between departments which will be able to interact electronically with each other in real time with the widespread use of the email service and consult diversified information sources (CNU, Codes and Laws of Italy, Official Joumal, etc.). Intemal and extemal communication will therefore be significantly facilitated by the Institution which, among other things, is investing qualified financial and professional resources in strengthening the editorial cell of the Corps' WEB site.
Unitary for Public Administration (RUPA). ____________
• creation of equipment specifically intended for "out-of-area" logistical support and rationalization of "area" ones with regard to the sectors of equipment and clothing, transport and firefighting, flight line support equipment, air traffic control and flight assistance , healthcare and infrastructure, with direct "outsourcing" for sectors of lesser operational value;
• acquisition of an operational capability in the GE field through the development of PODs, one of which is for electronic reconnaissance (Tactical ESM) and one for jamming (Support Jammer) • development in the context of the intemational MEADS program, conducted in cooperation with the United States and Germany , of anti-aircraft systems for area defense with low-layer ATBM (anti-ballistic missile) capabilities, destined to enter service in the next decade;
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it As a transmission support, while awaiting the completion (scheduled for 2006) of the very high capacity digital radio link network that the PF has at an advanced stage of implementation, the Army is using the
9.2.7 Technological innovation programs in the Carabinieri. In terms of technological innovation, in consideration of the widespread articulation and breadth of the organization of the Carabinieri, an innovative global computerization program of the dependent departments is already being developed (Project “IR”). It will allow the radical renewal of the technological park and is aimed at creating "electronic govemance" of the entire organization. medium altitude and long autonomy (PREDATOR program);
• acquisition of a reconnaissance capability based on the use of class a unmanned aircraft
OF THE AERONAUTICAL SEGMENT reconnaissance to be introduced into service starting between 2010-2012 (JSF programme);
Below is a summary of the programs with the expected completion times and costs expressed in billions of lire.


182 Substantial investments have been allocated to the renewal of the "Gamma 400" mobile radio network, which will lead to the creation of a specific cellular network for the needs of FPs, in system with the new digital radio link network.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
9.3 Policy of intemational cooperation in the field of the transfer of materials As previously mentioned, another aspect that increasingly characterizes the Italian Armed Forces is that of multinationality. This is an increasingly evident peculiarity of the intemational scenario, where on the one hand the general decrease in defense resources and on the other the growing spirit of cooperation even between countries that were once adversaries leads them to pool their forces. As is known, the Italian Armed Forces are undergoing a strong downsizing, moving from a mixed force level of 250 thousand units towards a professional model of 190 thousand units by December 2004. This downsizing, at the same time as a more elaborate political push to technological renewal initiated by the Defense has made a large quantity of means and materials available, as they were surplus to requirements.
Consistent with this renewed approach, the availability of materials and means (even if largely technologically outdated) and their transfer have constituted and constitute a valid and concrete instrument of foreign policy, in particular towards those member countries of the Partnership for Peace ( PfP).
• identify an armed force to which to assign joint responsibility for the development of operational requirements for equipment and materials with similar characteristics, even if in use by different armed forces; • proceed with collective acquisitions; ____________ In this context, an intense activity has developed, substantiated by the tendency to establish "Agreements" regarding cooperation with various Nations, giving away the exuberant material free of charge as shown in the following table:
The new teleintercom systems for the stations are already operational which allow you to immediately contact the department staff involved in carrying out extemal services, equipped with a special mobile phone, or, if the mobile device is tumed off or unreachable, to establish video contact directly with the Operations Center of the Carabinieri Company responsible for the emergency telephone district (112). will allow for careful planning of services and the use of personnel, encouraging the development of operational statistics and the analysis of criminal events, as well as the management of soldiers with regards to weekly rest periods, leaves of absence and overtime , etc.).
9.4 Operation Policy Any choice made on the technological and operational level of the use of forces has a direct and immediate impact on the operation sector, understood as the activities necessary to preserve, guarantee, ascertain and restore efficiency, suitability to the use of materials and the right degree of reliability, effectiveness and safety based on the original operational requirement. As is known, this activity requires increasing costs as they are linked to the technology of the increasingly sophisticated systems themselves. This requires pursuing a policy oriented, already in the research phase, towards systems capable of containing the operational needs, within acceptable limits and in any case preestablished in the phase of definition of the military technical-operational requirements: in other words it is necessary to consider from the first phases of studying the "Life Cycle Cost" (LCC) of each system, by carrying out accurate cost analyzes (LCA).
Technological modemization naturally also involves the research and acquisition of materials and equipment that better respond to the needs of personnel in different operational situations: from new equipment for public order to sophisticated equipment for scientific investigations.
For a more profitable and flexible use of connections, new digital telephone exchanges are being installed, which will reduce the number of current analogue switchboards with a significant recovery of units and an improvement in the quality of services.
In this context, there are many initiatives that can be adopted, each of which requires dedicated in-depth analysis, such as: • directing the planned interventions towards the civil industry; • identify inter-force maintenance centers of excellence, at existing military structures, where all similar equipment and weapon systems, even if from different armed forces, can be brought together for the most complex maintenance activities;
MAIN TRANSFERS MADE FREE OF CHARGE TO THIRD COUNTRIES


183 Unit maintenance activities in operations In operations the Units must preserve their mobility, especially in high intensity operations and in a non-permissive environment.
Therefore, the types of interventions that users can carry out, contrary to what happens on site, tend downwards, transferring the most expensive interventions to the GSA.
Newly introduced materials are usually accompanied by a warranty assistance service for the first years of life.
9.4.1 Land segment The Army, in relation to the operational environment in which it operates, has configured logistics in two areas.
The maintenance activities of the Units in garrison In the garrison the maintenance activity varies depending on the family to which the material belongs (commercial vehicles, tactical vehicles, combat vehicles, weapon systems, etc.) and depending on the capabilities needed for repair ; it can be carried out at the user of the material, at specialized FA workshops, at specialized civil companies and finally at the companies manufacturing the material. Usually users are responsible for scheduled maintenance and checks; furthermore, in relation to the available resources (specialised personnel, spare parts and equipment) they can also carry out repairs of a certain complexity.
Piling of supplies to combat units must be avoided, in order not to limit their mobility. of arms.
• standardize, at joint level, the criteria for defining the life cycle of materials and systems Supplies to units in operations In operations the units are supplied by a department called the Adherence Support Group (GSA). This department, of variable composition, is calibrated for the specific mission. In low-conflict operations it is possible to outsource some services in order to recover specialized logistics structures. ____________ Supplies to the garrisoned Units The supply of the garrisoned Units is ensured from the Support Area. Through careful planning of the users' needs, cyclically or ad hoc, it brings the requested materials to the permanent location. To carry out this task, the Support Area uses warehouses/depots located throughout the national territory, using a transport system dedicated to this task.
The analysis will be divided in relation to the operational environment in which they operate: in garrison and in operations.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it Two of the main logistics functions, "Resupply" and "Maintenance", are illustrated below.
9.4.2 Naval segment In the Navy, the tasks relating to logistics functions are institutionally divided between the MM Commissariat and Administrative Coordination Inspectorate (MARISPECOMMI) for the sectors of MEMBERSHIP AREA: responsible for logistical support of combat units in operations. Its Command, Management and Executive bodies are all capable of operating without fixed infrastructures and can be projected outside the national territory. Furthermore, they are able to operate in non-permissive environments with a high level of conflict;
SUPPORT AREA: responsible for direct support to all FA units/bodies when they are in garrison. Guarantees the procurement and availability of the materials necessary for the Membership Area for operations. It ensures, through the management of FA stocks, the continuous availability of resources. Its Command, Management and Executive bodies cannot be projected and can only operate in fixed installations.
Regardless of the working hypotheses illustrated above, the organizational structures that currently characterize the sector are reported below.
Since the mid-eighties, the FA has moved from a logistical organization "by subject" to one "by function". In summary, the operators in the sector, before 1980, acted and were divided according to the type of material on which they operated (light weapons, artillery, engineering, police station, etc.), following the restructuring, the reference of the organizational architecture is in relation to the function that operators perform regardless of the type of material. Here today we find specialized personnel and entire operational units that are interested in supplies, others who are dedicated to maintenance and still others responsible for transport etc..


2001. single for the FF.AA.. From the 2002 financial year, the definition of a contract is expected which will gradually move from "manufacturing with fabrics and accessories to be paid by the CEO" to "supply of clothing with fabrics and accessories to be paid by the company" and which should assume this final structure, in a definitive and total form, by the beginning of 2003.
The "personalized dressing" project is still in its embryonic phase and a study of which has been started by the DG itself. food, clothing, barracks, fuels/lubricants and vehicles and the Inspectorate for Naval Logistical Support and Lighthouses (NAVISPELOG) for the sectors of ship maintenance, management of spare parts/materials, ammunition and lighthouses and signaling seafarers. MARISPECOMMI is also responsible for the acquisition of goods and services in the catering, cleaning and labor sectors.
9.4.2.3 Barracks The acquisition of barracks materials is implemented on the basis of the actual needs of the FA, keeping stocks to a minimum in order to avoid unnecessary redundancies in the warehouses. Purchases at central level are carried out on the basis of the centralized plan prepared for the DG on the basis of the needs reported by the peripheral High Commands (of the territorial organization of the MM) and the elements provided by the Maricommi (warehouse situations and average annual consumption).
Material spare parts and decentralized purchases are donated to the Maricommi responsible for the area.
Finally, it carries out study activities regarding improvements and innovations on police station materials with experiments and proposals to the competent technical General Directorates, maintaining and updating the relevant technical regulations.
Functions carried out by the Navy Commissariat Inspectorate (MARISPECOMMI)
9.4.2.1 Food The supply of food needed by the FA is carried out in a centralized or decentralized manner, for an annual budget of around 60 billion relating to a force of around 40,000 units. The consequent logistical activities are carried out territorially by the Directorates and Sections of the Maritime Military Commissariat (Maricommi), which examine the requests and initiate the procurement procedures necessary to restore the logistics cycle and, at a central level, with centralized or decentralized purchasing planning by of the competent DG or of the MM Commissariat Inspectorate. Within the framework of the new sector "policy", the regulatory instrument for increasing the value of rations and for the transition to cash rations is being defined. The outsourcing of the service through procurement from large-scale retail trade with maintenance for the MM of naval "transit warehouses" at the offices of La Spezia, Taranto and Augusta is being studied by the competent DG.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The Navy Commissariat Inspectorate carries out administrative coordination activities with regard to all MM bodies and also involves the Administration Directorates of the FA. By virtue of its new regulations, the Inspectorate has acquired the right to exercise coordination in the FA field of the provisions issued by Segredifesa on administrative matters. The Inspectorate carries out consultancy and interpretation activities in administrative-logistical matters for the central and peripheral bodies of the MM.
Furthermore, pursuant to Presidential Decree 451/90, it carries out technical control activities on the functionally dependent MM Commissariat Bodies and, lastly, on the service canteens in implementation of article 2 of the Ministerial Decree of 1 August
9.4.2.2 Clothing The procurement of clothing for MM needs is implemented in a centralized or decentralized manner, for approximately 45 billion of overall annual budget; of these, 12 billion are intended to finance the tailoring contract ("tailoring contract") for different types of ordinary and special clothing, based on the strength programs indicated by the SM. The logistical activities are carried out locally by the Maricommi, who examine the requests, initiate the procurement procedures and update the stock situations in real time and, at a central level, with purchase planning drawn up by the Inspectorate in agreement with the SM and subsequently devolved to the competent DG or to the Maricommi. The new policy indicated by the DG hypothesizes the suppression of military tailoring in order to reach a clothing contract in the medium/long term ____________ 184


9.4.2.5 Vehicles The MM vehicles are the vehicles used for "technical, operational, training and logistical services" destined for the Commands/Bodies of the technical-operational area of the Navy. A very limited number of vehicles are made up of "ad personam" cars which are assigned according to the specific legislation in force. The quantitative allocations and types of vehicles to be assigned based on the specific needs of the individual organizational elements are defined by MARISPECOMMI. The vehicle acquisition (executed by the competent DG) and maintenance program is identified annually on the basis of the funds made available in the budget and in relation to the needs for replacing old vehicles and maintenance of the vehicle fleet.
Fuels and lubricants "Outsourced" services The peripheral High Commands, on which the main and secondary departments depend, are allocated funds for the maintenance of vehicles, for maintaining the efficiency of the automotive workshops set up at the same departments and for the payment of motorway tolls. During the EF 2001 the SMM made funds available for 8.4 billion. for maintaining the number of vehicles, and approximately 10 billion. for maintenance. In order to optimize the use of the financial resources allocated for the management of the Navy's vehicle fleet, a contract is being stipulated on a national basis for the maintenance of both light and heavy vehicles supplied. The possibility of proceeding with the acquisition of vehicles including "service" for maintenance and technical assistance by the supplier company, the retrosale of the vehicle at the end of a 5-year period of use is also being evaluated. , the use of "leasing" for representative cars or for those assigned "ad personam".
9.4.2.4 The petroleum products of greatest interest to MM are: naval fuel; aviation fuel; automotive fuels; fuels for heating, kitchens and showers; lubricants. The management program for the aforementioned products is defined annually both on the basis of the funds made available in the budget (for the EF 2001 total availability of 85 billion), and in relation to the consumption incurred in the previous year, and, finally, on the basis of the operational and training activity planned by the SMM. The program also takes into account the need to establish a strategic reserve determined by the expected operational regulations.
Functions carried out by the Naval Logistics and Lighthouses Inspectorate (NAVISPELOG)
9.4.2.7 Current situation - ammunition Following the reorganization measures of the technical-industrial area of Defence, the maintenance, replenishment and management of ammunition material stocks are moving from the "Naval Armaments" DG to the Support Inspectorate Naval, Logistics and Lighthouses with the aim of reaching full capacity starting from 1 January 2002. Stock levels of ammunition of all types are established on the basis of the following needs:
9.4.2.6 The impossibility of replacing civilian personnel employed in the service sector as they approach retirement, the reduction of military cadres established by law 331/2000 on professional military service and the progressive reduction of conscript personnel in the FF .AA., have made it increasingly necessary to rely on private industry for some services previously ensured, mainly through the use of Defense Administration personnel (so-called "outsourcing" of services).
In order to proceed with the total elimination of petrol depots by 2005 in relation to the high management and compliance costs, the progressive replacement of petrol-powered vehicles with diesel-powered ones has been underway since 1999. An action is also underway aimed at restructuring the storage and distribution network of naval fuels, through the use of private industry for direct supply to naval units, maintaining the product stored in POL depots as a strategic reserve.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it Catering, cleaning, labor and transport, which in the past had a marginal impact on the entire pool of financial resources intended to ensure the performance of the various services, have led to continuous adjustments to the spending forecasts and the consequent allocations of funds allocated in the budget. ____________ By way of example, from an annual requirement of around 20 billion to ensure outsourced cleaning and catering needs in 1995, we have moved on to a financial commitment of around 60 billion in the current year, with a marked tendency for the future to a constant and progressive increase in funding needs strictly and proportionally commensurate with the decrease in employees assigned to these tasks.
185


o Planning and carrying out periodic and occasional maintenance on the canal; o Planning the purchase of spare parts relating to the on-board systems in order to allow maintenance, repair and maintenance of strategic stocks.
The general fleet support functions managed by the Naval Support Inspectorate are:
Furthermore, suitable resources are needed to align the current real quantities of ammunition "in war" with the values prescribed for the stock levels of the aforementioned materials. The resources are directly proportional to the total quantities of ammunition to be managed, or to the stock levels that represent the reference to be pursued. Faced with this, the progressive contraction of the resources assigned for the above interventions actually makes it very difficult to ensure both the maintenance of current stock levels for artillery materials and underwater weapons and a recovery in the consistency of missile weapons, now aligned on quantities just above NATO stock levels, and this solely to take into account the technical unavailability found on average for said material.
At the same time as the needs indicated above, which involve the availability of stocks of ammunition that are effective from a technical-operational point of view for countering the threat, there is also the need to maintain their efficiency over time, given the constant progress of their aging technical, in addition to the need to have sufficient materials to allow the regular carrying out of the annual "hot" training activity. In summary, it is therefore necessary to have adequate resources to implement the appropriate interventions to deal with: • operational-performance obsolescence of the material; • periodic achievement by the various batches of ammunition or specific components (fuzes, pyro components, limited-life components) constituting this material, of the "expiration life" date; • constant consumption of ammunition per exercise.
In fact, there are no other bases suitable for supporting the fleet for off-site activities.
Following the restructuring of the technical-administrative area, the work establishments came under the control of the Inspectorate, concentrating activities on the three main air-naval hubs: Taranto, La Spezia, Augusta. months of conflict.
The current organization of repairs/maintenance, periodic and/or occasional, of the canal identifies NAVISPELOG as the organizational element responsible for planning them and the MM Arsenals as the Work Establishments responsible for carrying out maintenance activities.
- ensure the availability of ammunition ready for NATO use at all times, to the extent established by the relevant doctrinal documentation; • ensure the availability of ready-to-use ammunition for WEU needs; • ensure the availability of ready ammunition for exclusively national needs; • establish a buffer capable of ensuring, where necessary, support for war activity for the first three The maintenance program of a major naval unit is divided into cycles lasting four years during which the following are carried out: o a stop for major maintenance works, GM, lasting approximately one year; ____________ 9.4.2.9
• Repairs Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it Based on the assignments received, the Naval Program is remodeled to adapt it to the financing (i.e. reduction and/or cutting of works and purchases).
In relation to the assigned program, the Plants define what can be done with intemal resources and what must be outsourced, and the need for the necessary materials, for general use and the centralized control cycle, finally drawing up a document, Program Annual Works and Services (PALS), summary of the necessary financial needs. These financial needs are centralized by the Inspectorate which integrates them by transforming them into financing requests for the MS.
Repair/maintenance logistics chain Current situation - materials Maintenance, periodic and occasional, is carried out according to a calendar program, which refers to intemal regulations and technical documents, or to the occurrence of a malfunction. The naval maintenance program, called the Naval Program, is drawn up by the Inspectorate for the three-year period following the reference year, and assigns a share of the existing shipping to each employee work establishment.
9.4.2.8 The general situation of the materials is particularly critical. The heavy budget reductions have resulted in a maintenance and logistics deficit whose effects have clearly emerged in the last two years; the situation of discovery, command and control and communication systems is particularly serious. Failures, sometimes very serious, occur with worrying frequency. At the moment there is no sign of a reversal of the trend.
186


The objectives that the FA intends to pursue in the medium and long term can be summarized as follows:
This "segment" also contributes, according to NATO standards, to the necessary Survive To Operate (STO), Combat Support and Combat Service Support capabilities at home and outside the area.
Occasional maintenance/repairs relating to faults that occur during operation are entrusted to structures within the Work Plants, the Direct Support Directorates (DSD), which have a complex structure, even if reduced to a few elements for each type. : military technicians (non-commissioned officers of various categories and specializations), specialized civilian workers, various types of Technical Assistance contracts stipulated with the major manufacturers of high-tech systems/equipment/systems existing on board. The DSDs are also entrusted with support interventions outside the Naval Unit's location of assignment, both in Italy and abroad. increase operational effectiveness.
Over the course of a year, on average, the following are on
maintenance stop: o 1 cruiser; or 2 destroyers; or 5 frigates; or 1 amphibious unit; o 1 logistical support unit; or 3 submarines; or 3/4 minesweepers; o 15/20 minor auxiliary units (off-shore tugs, sailing training ships, tankers, coastal transports, lighthouse support); or local shipping (port tugs, barges, pontoons, MEN, MBN, etc.).
• acquisition and management of carbon lubricants; • management, in order to guarantee the efficiency, usability and safety of FA's infrastructural assets; • management of police station materials, such as supplies, clothing and barracks; • healthcare support for operational departments; • administrative support; • coordination of accident prevention and environmental protection activities.
• logistical support at home and outside the area; maintenance of the efficiency of weapon systems (aircraft, helicopters, armament/avionics, etc.) and command and control systems (telecommunications, computer systems and sensors, etc.), various means/materials and equipment up to the expected technical level ; normally coinciding with previous work shifts.
• increase in the standardization of vehicles, materials and equipment where deemed suitable or two Scheduled Work Stops, SMP, lasting four/six months; or three entries into dry dock, periodic careening, lasting approximately 20/30 days, The functions of the logistics chain can therefore be summarized in the following essential capabilities: - operational testing of weapon systems, vehicles, materials and equipment, including certification and modifications in the field of FA, hardware and software of the weapon systems for immediate operational use; of infrastructure;
• rationalization of maintenance structures in the telecommunications and transport sectors as well ____________ This activity, which reports to the Logistics Command through the relevant territorial and peripheral branches, directly ensures seamless logistical support/sustainability to the Operational Departments, with operational research and experimentation activities and availability, management and use of the assigned resources, as well as their disposal at the end of the expected operating cycle, all with a view to maximum efficiency.
9.4.3 Aeronautical segment The logistics chain represents the set of capabilities necessary and indispensable to guarantee the FA the levels of efficiency and effectiveness of the weapon systems, materials, means and structures that allow the expression of the required operational capabilities.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it materials/equipment;
• maintenance of a concentrated and strategic maintenance capacity; • identification of centralized hubs (depots) for the entry/exit of vehicles from the FA Naval through its Naviglio Efficiency Office.
Off-site and foreign interventions are coordinated from time to time by the Support Inspectorate
• maintenance of operational testing capabilities of weapon systems, vehicles, materials and equipment as well as technical-operational certification and approval; • 187


188 That is, the company should have contractually ensured the efficiency of the machines without involving the Armed Forces except for pre-flight operations. In reality, the necessary application of the laws forces the administration to carry out the procedures for taking charge of the materials and sending the faulty parts for repair according to the usual procedures, which cannot be overcome by contractual devices. That is, the spare parts must be taken over by the Administration and only subsequently passed back to the company that carries out the work on the aircraft.
The daily functioning of the Italian Air Force with particular regard to aircraft efficiency issues is based, among other elements, on the management system of materials relating to flight activities. These include both aircraft spare parts and all ground equipment necessary for their support and maintenance. The management of the aforementioned materials is carried out following the classic logistical functions of acquisition, conservation, distribution and disposal.
For the entire operational life of the aircraft there is also the need to organize the repair of materials rendered inefficient due to unexpected breakdowns or due to scheduled overhaul of complex devices. These interventions can be carried out at Armed Forces entities or at extemal industry.
9.4.3.1 Bureaucratic procedures Furthermore, this reality also effectively prevents relief formulas for the Administration in managing efficiency.
Experience shows that this system presents evident characteristics of inadequacy and inefficiency, often compensated by the good will and quality of the staff involved. assigned tasks, imposes decisive action in the direction of the strong rationalization of all sectors and the resulting need to increase the level of "outsourcing" of certain logistical functions (in the sectors, for example, of the technical-maintenance support of systems supplied on the levels does not directly affect operations) where it can be potentially convenient in terms of cost/benefit of the utility provided.
The ongoing contraction of the FA's organic consistency, in the face of the need to continue to honor the further step must be carefully documented and approved. Particularly complex is the so-called load transfer (i.e. the physical/accounting possession of the material) between the Armed Forces and any repair industry, as well as the intemal passage of the repaired material subjected to acceptance and conformity procedures envisaged by the repair contract, always based on paper documentation. ____________ The reality described above, in its concrete daily unfolding, leads to an inevitable contradiction between the urgencies dictated by flight activity and the slavish paper bureaucracy required by every single movement of parts. In fact, the passage of materials from the operating body to the base warehouses, from these to the warehouses and every It should also be kept in mind that the regulations, in order to force strict compliance, identify specific legal figures who have personal responsibility for the situation of the materials. The Armed Forces, to balance both operational needs and timely compliance with regulations, has established a widespread organization made up of depots and warehouses whose managers coincide with the legal figures envisaged by the aforementioned accounting laws.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it In conclusion, all the legislation relating to line efficiency materials should be reformed, allowing movement based on real operational urgencies and protecting the interests of the Administration based on the degree of efficiency achieved. The management of materials should certainly ignore the traceability of the individual device, allowing the replacement of the faulty device with the efficient one without presuming an alteration of the state's assets. That is, you absolutely should In fact, the concept of exchange of materials is not accepted by the regulations, whereby a device sent for repair remains the property of the Armed Forces which must receive the same piece back.
The regulations date back to historical periods that did not prefigure the dynamic management required to maintain the efficiency of complex weapons systems made up of thousands of parts. annually a complete and detailed accounting report of the material in possession of the various bodies of the Armed Forces.
This causes delays of several days, nullifying the spirit of the contract which aimed to attribute entire responsibility to the company for the timing of restoring the aircraft. The worse is the result of the sending and repair procedure which involves extremely complex methods to guarantee the traceability of the single piece required by the regulations.
Such activities are fully subject to state accounting laws. Current regulations are particularly strict regarding the management of state-owned materials; at any moment it must be possible to know the state and physical position of each material. It must also be provided Without going into further detail of the problem, it is sufficient to mention the recent experience linked to the C130J aircraft. For this, the Armed Forces requested five-year "tumkey" logistical support from the manufacturing industry.


The logistics functional chain, therefore, has very particular connotations as:
• identifies needs; • takes care of supplies, supplies and maintenance activities. the achievement of maximum adherence of the support to the needs of the Departments through the increase, where possible, of the home service and the entrusting of some executive activities to third parties, with the aim of retuming personnel to more properly operational activities.
In harmony with the regulatory framework of the reorganization measures of the Force, the procedures aimed at establishing the Technical Logistics Administrative Groupings at the Interregional Commands have been started. These departments will be assigned the task of ensuring logistical support on an area basis.
The Regions are assigned a set of logistical bodies (Command, Management and Executive) which give them high levels of autonomy.
• a cyclical planning and programming activity; • the optimization of available resources; • the simplification and rationalization of procedures and inventory management; • constant study and research activity;
9.4.4.2 It is made up of the complex of personnel, Commands, Bodies, Departments and means (logistic instrument) which, at different levels, carry out logistical activities in order to guarantee the support of the forces. With reference to the means and materials:
Logistics organization of the Army
9.4.4 Carabinieri Segment 9.4.4.1 Supply policy in the Carabinieri Logistical support is developed through a constant balancing of needs and possibilities in order, however, to operate in terms of efficiency, effectiveness, adherence and cost-effectiveness . This line of action is pursued by the General Command of the Army through:
At a central level, executive activities are carried out exclusively for the telematic materials of the "Transmission Laboratory". develop legislation based on the result that must be achieved (high efficiency of aircraft) rather than on detailed control of the parts.
It should be noted that the current situation, in addition to constituting an unacceptable waste of the Administration's human resources, also prevents the application of advanced outsourcing concepts to these activities.
In the logistics area, the sectors in which significant outsourcing interventions are underway are those of vehicle maintenance, provisioning and uniform supply, which will be discussed later.
• Goveming bodies, functionally classified in Departments II, III and IV of the General Command.
Logistics which makes use, for this purpose, of the Logistics Office; ____________ budget allocations.
• verify the support processes and related workloads; • review the current bureaucratic-logistical and administrative procedures; • identify the activities that can be delegated to extemal parties within the limits of the possibilities permitted by the Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
• Command bodies: General Commander, Chief SM, Deputy Chief SM, Head IV Department and Inspector The central logistics activity is guaranteed by:
Within the framework of the policy of optimizing resources through a targeted recovery of personnel from sectors that are not strictly operational to strengthen the institutional service, in recent years the following steps have been taken: •
• it is designed to support departments constantly in maximum operating conditions; • has an essentially static device; • is divided into just two levels - the General Command and the Regions/Schools/Btg. - without intermediate gear reduction mechanisms. The Interregional Commands/ Divisions/Brigades, in fact - in the more general framework of their command action - currently carry out exclusively coordination and logistical control functions in order to guarantee unity of direction.
In summary, the Army, like other Military Organizations, has moved from "just in case" logistics, i.e. based on the analysis of potential needs, with consequent burdensome and unused accumulation of materials to deal with any type of emergency, to "just in time" logistics, which, based on accurate planning and preventive programming activities, based on the determination of actual needs, provides what is needed when needed, minimizing inventories.
189


____________ In harmony with these forecasts, the most important interventions were implemented in the motorization sector with a new repair policy, in the provisioning sector with the assignment of the service to extemal companies in some departments, in the uniform supply sector with the packaging of the uniforms after taking anthropometric measurements and the delivery of the products to your home.
• one-way flow of supplies; • standardization of fuels and related support in order to ensure greater interoperability between land and air forces (adoption of the Single Fuel Concept) and consequently reduce the costs mainly associated with transport and storage;
The peripheral organization of the various services will consequently be rearticulated in line with the provisions of the reorganization provision.
• modularity of the forces, so as to be able to create the most suitable instrument to deal with the specific contingency, especially outside the national territory;
• concept of an "integrated and joint system" for materials, vehicles and related multimodal carriers, with a high degree of standardization or, at least, interoperability with allied nations; • for out-of-area operations, development of a concept of centralized logistical support at joint force level by devolving the organizational activity to the Joint Forces Summit Command (COI).
For some lines of vehicles already in the logistics cycle, the maintenance activity of the vehicles involves an increasing use of private industry which will allow the proportion of Army personnel currently employed in these tasks to be progressively reduced. At the same time, for newly acquired vehicles, innovative contractual clauses have been introduced which contemplate multi-year "assisted maintenance" programs by the assistance centers of supplier companies, while the use of fleet rental for particular vehicle lines is being tested ( armored cars).
The typical logistical activities of supply, replenishment, recovery and clearance, maintenance, transport and healthcare, in support of the Bodies and Departments down to the minimum levels, are carried out by the Management and Executive Bodies as part of the logistics services illustrated below, according to specifications " basic policies” which outline the implementation criteria.
9.6 Inventory Policy There are many factors that influence the creation of inventory levels. Among the main ones are the following: assessment of the risk and intensity of potential conflicts and targeted military interventions, waming time, readiness of forces, location of units, availability of reinforcements and transport resources,
9.5 Logistics Support Policy If the deployment of forces must take place in predetermined times and sometimes at short notice and over large spaces, the logistics instrument must be balanced and mobile in all its components; this requires the preparation of modules that allow the organization to be quickly reconfigured. The Defense, in this sector, has formulated some general guidelines referring to employment situations that are common as possible and tend to be among the most onerous.
In particular:
The various services in their current configuration are listed below: - Commissariat Service; - Motor Vehicle Service; - Health Service; - Veterinary Service; - Engineering Works Service; - Infrastructure Service; - Armament and Special Equipment Service; - Telematics Service; - Air Service; - Naval Service.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
• articulation of the device into just two functional bands - the rear one for support and the advanced one for grip
- in which the responsible commands and the levels of logistical capacity are specified;
To implement govemment guidelines, given the need to recover units to be allocated to territorial control, measures have been adopted to rationalize executive logistical activities, while at the same time expanding the assignment to third parties of activities not directly linked to institutional missions. This line of action, already foreseen with the 1997 Finance Law, was also confirmed in the regulatory provisions for the reorganization of the Carabinieri (articles 1 and
28 of Legislative Decree 297/2000).
190


191 On the other hand, the Army finds itself facing a situation of "abundance" of spare parts for old generation combat vehicles, a consequence of the reduction of the tool and their simultaneous gradual replacement with new generation systems.
However, the fact remains that at present the situation is deficient. possibility of storage, technological level of materials, degree of multinationality and standardization of systems, available civil support, financial resources that can be transferred to the sector.
This situation is, however, finding a partial solution through the transfer, to countries with which cooperation agreements are in place, of parts of the aforementioned old generation weapon systems, complete with an initial autonomy of spare parts.
However, even in this sector, especially for some types of ammunition, the situation is deficient.
The NATO directive provides that the forces seized may initially have at least 30 days of autonomy, part following the units and part guarded by the readily available Nation. Regarding the quantification of ammunition stocks, a complete review of the calculation criteria is underway within NATO. This topic is treated, in the following paragraphs, in a more exhaustive manner within the illustration by functional area of Defence.
9.6.1.2 Ammunition As regards the definition of ammunition stocks, a complete review of the calculation criteria is underway within NATO. In particular, for war ammunition, and more specifically for those with a caliber greater than
20 mm, (defined as "battle-decisive ammunition"), the calculation to quantify stocks is no longer linked to the well-known "day of fire" parameters or “combat life” and does not take into account any time factors.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
9.6.1 Land segment 9.6.1.1 Spare Parts The almost complete "outsourcing" of the maintenance of the FA's commercial vehicle fleet has made it possible to achieve almost zero spare parts stocks for this type of vehicle - except for consumables ( batteries, covers, windshield wiper blades, etc.) - for which the minimum level of autonomy has been maintained, by virtue of their ready availability on the market.
However, stocks of spare parts are maintained for combat, tactical and tactical-logistic vehicles not of commercial origin, taking into account the time needed by the industry for their production. For these means, even if the need has decreased compared to the past, a quantitative and qualitative deficiency must still be complained about. ____________ This ammunition, in fact, is calculated according to the "objective-oriented" methodology, which, using a mathematical model, allows the stocks to be calculated in terms of the number of shots necessary to destroy the objectives envisaged in the different planning hypotheses (Planning Situations). , of which the "most expensive" one is taken as a reference for the constitution of the stocks itself. The results of this procedure, currently being refined, must be verified in terms of their financial feasibility and adequate storage possibilities.
However, as far as training ammunition is concemed, the stocks are calculated taking into account that the quantities to be acquired must not exceed the maximum numerical values that can be consumed in the period equal to the validity of the ammunition itself or, in the case of long durations, for its life. technique of the weapon system that uses it. These calculations also consider the "additions" that the training stocks receive from war ammunition close to the limit of their technical life, as part of a correct rotation. In this regard, it should be noted that the release for consumption of war ammunition that would otherwise be destined for disuse is undoubtedly one of the most sensitive problems for the purposes of economic management of stocks, also to avoid subsequent costly disposals.


This last operation made it possible to eliminate almost all the stocks in the Territorial Food Warehouses and will lead to their definitive closure by the end of 2002.
This process has led to a drastic reduction in the purchase of barracks materials (reduced in the last five years from
20 billion lire to 13 billion lire) and to the elimination of food supply plans.
Particular effort has been dedicated, in the sector of inventory management, to the activation of unified inventory management, currently divided between Arsenal-controlled materials (destined for work on the Naval Units) and centralized-controlled materials (destined for the establishment and maintenance of stocks). The activation of the Warehouse Directorates of Taranto, La Spezia and Augusta has begun, with the task of managing the warehouses belonging to the naval logistics cycle.
To date, approximately 15% of the Systems/Equipment considered of operational relevance have been taken over for configuration control, and the Regulations relating to the definition of the initial equipment have been reworked, in order to adapt them to the new organization and review the algorithms.
As regards the first point, the actions already carried out by the FA Logistics Command have mainly focused on reducing purchases which, in recent years, have been limited to the bare minimum. directly related to the performance of operational activities; • elimination and disposal of excess materials from warehouses; • use of out-sourcing.
In particular, with regards to the management of the Configuration and Definition of the Logistical Support of Materials, the Armed Force has equipped itself with a new basic document for the Management of the configuration of naval units and systems/equipment, a future point of reference for procedures and division of tasks and responsibilities in the matter.
9.6.2 Naval segment Current situation - escorts As part of the restructuring of the Navy, the escort sector has been involved in the consolidation of support definition and management activities, advancement of cooperation programs with other Navies, participation in future acquisitions of vehicles and systems.
• reduction in supplies and consequent reduction in inventories of non-materials ____________
9.6.3.2 Commissariat The rationalization process in FA in the food, clothing and barracks sectors, which began a few years ago, is developing
according to the following guidelines:
As regards the fuel lubricants stocks sector, there are shortages especially in the training sector to the point of affecting the pilots' flying activity.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The use of out-sourcing has been underway for some time and in this context a greater use of peripheralization in purchasing and a greater use of extemal companies for both clothing and clothing is envisaged.
Taking advantage of the possibilities offered by current regulatory provisions, large quantities of clothing and barrack material declared out of use for technical reasons or, in any case, unusable were transferred to volunteer organizations and humanitarian associations free of charge.
9.6.3 Aeronautical segment
9.6.3.1 Ammunition and fuel lubricants stocks The armaments supply sector presents a situation of shortage of stocks mainly in the unguided (non-intelligent) air/ ground drop ammunition component. This shortage of stocks is also being made up for with the latest contracts put in place by the Administration.
Even in this sector, especially for some materials and for some types of ammunition, the situation is deficient.
As regards the "reclamation" process of the warehouses, it should be noted that this process has involved the logistics bodies in eliminating all those materials that are no longer usable and have accumulated over the years.
In the sector of Coordination of Intemational Activities, Studies and Logistics Regulations, intemational and/or interforce cooperation activities were carried out on technical-logistical issues relating to the U-212A, FSAF/PAAMS, NAMSA, NATO CALS Management Board and transfer of materials to FF.AA. abroad (Albania, Tunisia, etc.). The activity relating to the adoption of the Bar Code continued and finally the contribution for the telematic modemization of the management systems and valorisation of the information produced with the correct application of the logistics disciplines continued.
192


the activity of the dependent articulations during field redeployments;
• the preparation of procedures, methodologies and equipment suitable for optimization and rationalisation This formula involves the entrusting of all meal packaging services to companies, including the supply of food.
The intensification of procedures aimed at the outsourcing of all catering services through the "complete catering" formula is envisaged.
Missile systems and mobile components of the Command and Control system designed to operate, in whole or in part, outside their permanent locations;
• the ability of "Operational Survival" and "Logistics Support" to the Flight Departments, Mobile Units However, the actual achievement of this objective is heavily conditioned by the technical-administrative procedures, which impose the operation of the General Directorate of the Commissariat and General Services as the Center of Administrative Responsibility and responsible for therefore supervising all activities of a technical-administrative related to the stipulation of contracts, approval of Technical Specifications, execution of tests, etc.
Barracks. This constitutes a primary objective of the Armed Forces, especially as regards the entrusting of the manufacturing of clothing items to extemal industry with the consequent elimination of Military Tailors.
To achieve the above stated purpose, the RMS was entrusted, among others, with the task of ensuring:
9.8 Movement and Transport Policy The new strategic functions of the sector impose, especially as regards the land instrument, an accentuated mobility of forces not only in the tactical field, but also and above all at a strategic level. In this context, maritime and air transport means are of particular importance.
9.7 Military Healthcare Policy The sector, currently in considerable difficulty due to a significant exodus of highly specialized personnel, requires an urgent, substantial and radical review. The reference model on which it is currently structured, adapted to Armed Forces of considerable size and mainly sedentary, is in stark contrast with the current needs for strong mobility and streamlining dictated by the new NATO doctrine. From this perspective, the Defense has set itself the objective of interforce harmonization of Military Health, through the establishment of an ad hoc "Task Force" for the identification of a new structure and an adequate regulatory instrument for its reorganization. This new structure should solve the current problems of the sector, currently rather fragmented and with a management of resources that is inevitably not always cost-effective. ____________ exposed to risks and for those units destined for the Reaction Forces with "outside air" redeployments.
The Mobile Support Department was established with the aim of achieving STO capability on multiple bases Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The organizational structure includes, in addition to the Operational Technical Services Group, Operational Logistics Services Group, Road Transport Group, Administrative Service and the Defense Group, two Support Squadrons capable of supporting their own personnel and a contingent of equal size of combat forces, guaranteeing the essential services for carrying out the flight activity of the redeployed departments, supporting at least two contemporary needs, as is the case at the moment, which sees the Armed Force busy with the redeployment of Dakovica and Pristina.
The organizational structure of the Department was designed to carry out the assigned tasks and in compliance with the principles deriving from the new doctrine which see the concepts of flexibility, mobility, standardization and sustainability even more established.
9.6.3.3 The Mobile Support Department In line with NATO dictates, which required the AM Units to have a complete Survive To Operate (STO) capability, in a context of operations supported both by the permanent locations and by any redeployment locations, the Aeronautica Militare has equipped itself with a Mobile Support Department (RMS) which is based at Villafranca Airport in Verona.
The negotiation activities relating to the identification of the companies called upon to supply the AM canteens with food, including the provision of the related services, must be carried out by the competent DG; Furthermore, current legislation provides that specific agreements in the sector can also be concluded with CONSIP.
• maintenance of the equipment/equipment supplied.
In this regard, it should be underlined that the times for the transition, on a national scale, to the complete catering formula essentially depend on the completion of the infrastructural adjustments and, for reasons of management economy, the transformation will have to take place first of all at the entities without civilian workers. of the CEO, given the obligation for the Administration to employ available civilian personnel in any case.
193


9.10 Clothing and Equipment Policy Always in compliance with the general spirit of rationalization and optimization of the logistics sector, in particular, a significant revision work has been started in the clothing and equipment sector Only a limited number of warehouses will be maintained for the supply of Naval Units.
And it is precisely in relation to the problems related to strategic transport that, given the very high cost of the machines, two options are being evaluated, namely, direct acquisition or participation in the creation of a pool of aircraft within the Alliance for common use.
Defense has therefore started actions to renew the fleet, with particular attention to the logistical sustainability of the new flight lines to be acquired. For the Transport line, the decision to modemize it with the acquisition of C130J and C27J aircraft is now consolidated while activities are underway relating to the replacement of the B707 in-flight refueling aircraft with modem B767s which would, at the same time, also guarantee a good strategic transportation capability.
• significantly lighten the logistical burden related to the sector up to now, eliminating a large part of the warehouses and central depots and, consequently, all goods movement activities.
9.9 Provisioning Policy In this vital and delicate sector, the implementation of a new policy aimed at almost completely outsourcing this service has recently begun, which will lead, in particular, to: • entrusting the food supply and provisioning service of the Defense sector to specialized sectors of "Large Retail", obviously with the necessary clauses to safeguard the needs and safety of the military;
As regards air transport, the current fleet, technologically dated, does not allow the air transport of some types of armored vehicles whose immediate availability is of particular importance in operational theatres.
For transport by sea, the Defense has evaluated the feasibility/convenience of purchasing naval transport units of the military Ro-Ro type. In this regard, after careful analysis, we have come to the conclusion that, although without completely excluding the use of such a carrier in the future, the most economically advantageous solution is the use of the rental of merchant vessels, seeking, however, contractual forms - exclusive use - who ensure said service at any time and condition. In this context, it should also be remembered that Defense has launched a study in order to identify a regulatory instrument that allows, in particular situations of national/intemational crisis, the acquisition of civil/merchant transport structures for the mobility needs of military forces engaged in Crisis Response Operations (CROs).
However, there remains the need to bring together at the level of the Defense General Staff, in a single Movement and Transport Office, all the organizational skills for the movement of troops and materials. • ____________
ESTIMATE OF THE COSTS INCURRED, ACCORDING TO THE ARMED FORCE AND THE CARRIER USED
FOR THE TRANSPORT OF MILITARY MATERIALS AND PERSONNEL. YEAR 2000 (VA - V.%)
ESTIMATE OF COSTS INCURRED ACCORDING TO THE ARMED FORCE AND THE CARRIER USED FOR
THE TRANSPORT OF MILITARY MATERIALS AND PERSONNEL. YEAR 1999 (VA - V.%) Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it the use of outsourcing for the manufacturing of clothing items.
• the reworking of the clothing tables, also in light of the entry of the female component; • the reduction of stocks in warehouses;
ESTIMATE OF THE COSTS INCURRED, ACCORDING TO THE ARMED FORCE AND THE CARRIER USED
FOR THE TRANSPORT OF MILITARY MATERIALS AND PERSONNEL. YEAR 1998 (VA - V.%) In this regard, data relating to the costs incurred in the years 1998-2000 are reported in tables "B-1", "B-2" and "B-3".
through:
Military air transport, although adequately sized, will not be sufficient to meet all defense needs. Also in this field, it will therefore be necessary to provide for the use and participation of civil carriers, with the same legislative/regulatory issues mentioned when dealing with sea transport.
194


These are, therefore, objectives which, in addition to being fundamental for the organizational efficiency of the military instrument, have a favorable impact on the well-being and morale of the personnel.
This concems, in fact, both young people called to fulfill their military obligations, who expect to find situations in the barracks that are not completely dissimilar to those of bourgeois life, and career military personnel, subject to frequent changes of location, due to the which the availability of service accommodation is a necessary condition for total and easy mobility.
10.3 POLICY FOR INFRASTRUCTURES FOR WOMEN VOLUNTEER WORK
10.3.1 Army
10.3.2 Navy
10.3.3 Air Force
10.1 General Aspects The problem of infrastructure in the Armed Forces has always been of high importance, due to the direct effects it has on personnel management.
10.1 GENERAL ASPECTS
10.2 CONSTRUCTION OF ACCOMMODATION WITH THE
“PROJECT FINANCING” SYSTEM
TO WEAPONS AND COMBAT ASSOCIATIONS
THE INFRASTRUCTURES
PART X
10.7 GRANT OF MILITARY STATE LAND PREMISES Among the interventions that the Defense has deemed priority, the following are highlighted those pertaining to the
sphere of well-being and services:
To this end, the Defense Administration is making every effort to carry out a program of progressive rationalization, through the disposal, or exchange, of all infrastructures no longer suitable for the changing needs of the Armed Forces.
OF THE CARABINIERI
10.6.1 Introduction
10.6.1.1 Military state property barracks
10.6.1.2 Civil state property barracks
10.6.1.3 Barracks in privately owned properties
10.6.1.4 Acquisition of abandoned properties from the FF.AA. ____________
10.6 INFRASTRUCTURE PROBLEMS OF THE WEAPON Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it In this context, in 1999 the Defense continued the work of renewing and modemizing the infrastructures, especially those intended to host volunteers, taking steps to adapt the housing standards and a project was developed for the construction of accommodation with the “Project Financing” system.
Over the last thirty years, given the limited financial resources available, much has been done, but this still appears insufficient to adapt and make the entire infrastructural park of the FF.AA. effective and efficient.
10.5 NATO INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAMS 10.5.1 NATO resources 10.5.2 AFSOUTH Command 10.5.3 Joint Command SOUTH of Verona
10.4.1 Disposal program 10.4.2 Special cases Taking into account that the infrastructures of the FF.AA. used by the military are often the result of the legacy received from the Risorgimento and since only a small part of them date back to the post-war period, it must be admitted that they are not able to provide adequate services and decent environments. It also follows that their level is not entirely compliant with the new and modem needs of the Armed Forces. just as they are not adequate for the continuous evolution of regulations on plant safety and accident prevention at work.
10.4 DISPOSAL/EXCHANGE PROGRAM 195


196
• following a specific tender, the implementation of the program is entrusted to a managing body which, with its own funds, provides for the construction of the accommodation according to housing standards indicated by the Defence. Ownership of the properties remains with the managing body which also bears the burden of maintenance costs; • the managing body grants use of the accommodation to military personnel, based on indications from the CEO, at an "acceptable" and convenient rent compared to the market; • the monthly fee may allow military personnel to “redeem” their housing; • the CEO assumes the burden of paying rent for the accommodation that remains temporarily making the land available;
• Compliance with regulations: we cannot yet say that we have reached the required safety standards even if the problem is particularly felt by the peripheral commands and the financial commitment that the Defense is dedicating to it is substantial.
• Defense identifies the needs by specifying the number of accommodations to be built in each location, responding to the changing needs of young people called to arms;
To this end, the Committee of Chiefs of Staff examined the "House System" Project (program for the construction of housing with a Project Financing method) which provides for the following implementation path:
• Conference rooms: the existing structures have been adapted and organized, in order to make them
• Canteens and refectories: almost all barracks are now equipped with "self-service" systems and suitable and welcoming rooms for consuming meals; • Heating systems: work is continuing to modemize the obsolete and old systems powered by diesel, replacing them with modem systems powered by methane, to guarantee cost-effectiveness and management efficiency;
Volunteer personnel in SP, obviously, must have the same right to access state-owned housing that is now reserved for U. and SU.. Basically, starting from 2005 the number of potential users of state-owned housing will increase considerably. The current financial prospects of the Defense do not allow to start a program of acquisition, or construction, of accommodation even to maintain the aforementioned "expectation" of accommodation. With article 16 of Law 266 of 18 July 1999 (Ordinary Link to the Financial Act), a regulatory instrument is available which can allow multiple possibilities for intervention which could not only eliminate one of the main obstacles to the movement of personnel, but also meet the expectations of all staff. ____________ Furthermore, by 2005, the Armed Forces will have a completely professional connotation and the hypothesized Defense Model, on the basis of current data, envisages the total availability of approximately 190,000 units of which over half are made up of Volunteers (on prolonged standstill or in Permanent Service Actual).
Furthermore, with a view to "testing" the satisfaction of the personnel, a rapid sample survey was also developed from which positive elements of response from the Army and Navy have already been received which highlight a willingness to join the Program estimated at between 70% and 90%.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The project, examined with the General Staff and the General Command of the Carabinieri, with the qualified collaboration of a consultancy company (Advisor), concluded with a feasibility study of the Program and with the draft of a Legislative Decree, as a normative vector of the problem.
10.2 The program for the construction of housing with the “Project Financing” system incurred in 2000 empty.
The following table summarizes the costs incurred by Defense in the aforementioned sectors.
At the moment, Officers and Non-Commissioned Officers are entitled to state housing, i.e. a group of around 100,000 potential users. The accommodations currently available are approximately 18,800. From the comparison between the aforementioned data, an accommodation "expectation" value of 1/5 emerges (accommodation/potential users ratio). In essence, accommodation is available for one person in 5 (the aforementioned value declines if one takes into account that among the 18,000 accommodations there are dilapidated ones, occupied by retired personnel or located in areas where departments have been abolished).


• use existing infrastructure by assigning the "female soldiers", where possible, separate barracks or, altematively, floors of reserved dormitories creating, if necessary, "dedicated" accesses.
10.3.1 Army infrastructure "Policy" The typological solution identified, therefore, is that of the living cell for 2-4 people which also ensures the availability, within its area, of "dedicated" toilets. In this regard, it was deemed appropriate to outline the following criteria that must be followed within the FA: • define the minimum standards, excluding excessively onerous "digressions"; • identify accommodation solutions proportionate to the influx of female personnel at the training institutes, such as the Military Academy of Modena (30 – 40 units) and the Cadet Marshals School (70 – 100 units), evaluating, consequently, the possibility of timely implementation;
The Legislative Decree also provides that Defense contributes to the Program with the transfer of "Immovable Assets", thus The foregoing, and the limited financial resources, led to indicate to the Armed Forces an approach to the infrastructural problem based essentially on the use of what already exists. In essence, it was deemed possible to use the same infrastructures intended for male recruitment, resorting to "physical separation" only for activities in which it is essential to guarantee "privacy" (dorms/bedrooms, toilets and changing rooms, appropriately equipped with suitable facilities and sanitary fumishings).
In essence, each user is allowed to choose between the pure rental formula or the redemption formula, with the possibility of switching from one formula to the other at any time. In this sense, a financial hypothesis has been envisaged that allows the individual to achieve ownership of the accommodation within twenty years.
• firstly, the Official Managers (1st level); • secondarily, the Non-Commissioned Officers (2nd level);
• finally, the Volunteers (3rd level), the Defense arranged that the creations and/or adjustments of an infrastructural nature should initially concem the training institutes of the Cadres (Academies and Schools) and subsequently the training and employment units of the Volunteers .
• Scope and purpose; • Program Features; • Criteria for granting accommodation; • Program Management; • Obligations of the Manager; • Manager selection procedures; • Program Financing.
The aforementioned Draft Legislative Decree, on which residual reservations still remain, is made up of seven articles:
Considering that the legislative provision provided for recruitment based on the following implementation times:
10.3 Defense "Policy" for infrastructures intended for female volunteers Following the approval of Law 20 October 1999, n. 380 which established the Female Voluntary Service, the Defense General Staff developed the following "ad hoc" infrastructural "Policy" in coordination with the Armed Forces. ____________ Currently, given the long period that has passed, the procedural process for the approval of the provision should be reactivated.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it is envisaged that the managing body can provide accommodation not only "in blocks" (i.e. entire buildings), but also "in small nuclei" (i.e. inserted in residential complexes for civilian use), thus avoiding the feared "ghettoisation".
Some detailed organizational aspects are referred to Ministerial Regulations.
It has been estimated that the contribution to the Program of the aforementioned "Real Estate Assets" contributes significantly to the reduction of costs which, together with the use of all possible opportunities for reducing tax burdens, can reach the level of 30%.
The aforementioned criteria have the advantage of allowing good integration of female staff into the departments, since, with the exception of limited "additional supplies" for the toilets, the dormitories intended for women should have the same characteristics as those already used by men. In fact, we are of the opinion that, from the beginning of the female service, any form of "privilege" for "female soldiers" must be avoided, as this could constitute a reason for possible friction with the male component, with consequent negative on the esprit de corps of the departments.
Furthermore, there is the belief that the same women must have the as required by law 266/99, Art. 16.
197


198 The adaptation of two buildings for female recruitment is planned (estimated expenditure: 1200 million); each building can accommodate 144 volunteers. Adaptations to the provisioning, dressing and recreational facilities are also underway. The adaptation of the Infirmary is being planned.
235th RAV “PICENO” VITERBO MARSHALS STUDENT SCHOOL The work planned for the accommodation sector will guarantee the construction of dormitories for female staff (expected expenditure of 500 million). The adaptation of the Infirmary (waiting/hospitalization/medical examination rooms) is being planned. •
Infrastructure works in progress:
FOLIGNO ARMY SELECTION CENTER (PG) certainty of being treated impartially, that is, like a "soldier". This is in order to make them feel "integrated" in all aspects of military life. In this context, therefore, the possibility of reserving for women the last or first floor of a building of no. 3 floors (solution adopted by the US Army), could guarantee good functionality. This accommodation "separation" is also used by the Israelis who, in case of sufficient accommodation capacity of the infrastructure, still prefer to allocate isolated barracks for women, located on the ground floor, equal to those used by men. million for an implementation time of approximately 5-6 months. ____________
• the sports equipment is equipped not only with a changing room and showers for the visitors, but also with a changing room with attached showers currently in use by the instructor staff. The latter room can be made available to female military personnel. All these structures can, immediately, be sufficient to accommodate 15/20 female attendees. As the overall number of female staff increases, it will be necessary to intervene by creating a greater number of changing rooms, showers and toilets. The cost for this last solution is around 150 TURIN APPLICATION SCHOOL The School premises are suitable to accommodate, albeit with some adaptations, female staff. In particular: the toilets are differentiated;
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
10.3.2 Navy infrastructural "Policy" This "Policy" first of all provides for the achievement of the housing standards identified as "Spadolini modules" in the structures reserved for both training and the place of service. (accommodations with 6 or 4 beds with centralized or attached toilets). The foreseeable influx of female personnel, quantifiable at around 10% of the expected annual intake, as regards the categories of Officers and Non-Commissioned Officers, should lead to no significant changes to the already existing MM structures, while the most important works will be aimed, essentially , to the future recruitment of female volunteer personnel destined for the troop. An overall commitment of the order of 35 billion is conceivable, of which
10 billion destined for the adaptation
MONTE ROMANO RANGE MILITARY ACADEMY OF MODENA The Academy has already taken steps to modify some bedrooms intended for Officer Cadets for the needs of the female military personnel equal to n. 50 beds. adequate);
• adaptation of premises for health checks; • creation of changing rooms and waiting rooms for medical examinations, separate from the others;
• changing rooms in sports facilities (physical efficiency tests) separate from those of male staff.
OTHER DEPARTMENTS INTERESTED IN INFRASTRUCTURE ADAPTATION WORKS FOR THE ENROLLMENT OF FEMALE PERSONNEL 57th Rgt. “ABRUZZI” BAR for Military Penitentiary Organization INFANTRY SCHOOL of Cesano di Roma (RM)
• separation of some dormitories from those intended for male candidates (with separate toilets and Adjustments are planned to allow the Center to carry out the competition activity also for aspiring women. In particular the necessary works
I am:


199
10.4 The program for the sale/exchange/development of defense real estate CASERTA NCO SCHOOL The attic area called “Marzochella” will be converted into dormitories.
The number of accommodations is already sufficient to accommodate the students; However, it will be necessary to ensure the separation of the male and female sectors and to adapt the toilets.
The Modemization and Renewal programs are almost entirely aimed at the conversion of the Bases to new weapon systems and the logistical/operational reorganization of the FA. The real needs presuppose an annual financial availability (around 150 billion) which is much higher than that normally assigned up to now (100 billion on average) and which is leading to delays and imbalances in the operational plans launched.
POZZUOLI AIR FORCE ACADEMY (NAPLES)
10.3.3 Air Force infrastructure "Policy" With regard to infrastructure, the AM highlights that the state of use of the AM infrastructure park, dating back largely to the reconstruction of the 1950s, requires continuous maintenance interventions and non-compliant regulatory updates always promptly achievable due to the inadequacy of the assignments on the exercise chapters. of the structures of the Training Centers and others, reserved for Officers and Non-Commissioned Officers and the remaining 25 billion, to be used for the necessary infrastructural modifications of the barracks, for the benefit of the remaining enlisted personnel in all locations of expected/possible destination.
FLORENCE AIR WAR SCHOOL The top floor of the Official Housing Building will have to be renovated. Given the typology of the rooms, it was planned to resort to the use of equipped walls. Replacement of fixtures is also necessary. ____________ These assumptions have highlighted that, to make it possible to enlist female personnel in a short time, it will be necessary to proceed with the adaptation of the initial training institutes (Academy, NCO school, 70th Wing of Latina which carries out the courses for the pilot's license AM). The following table shows the infrastructural works (situation point) that the Air Force is carrying out or has already carried out for the enlistment of female personnel.
• at the Departments and peripheral bodies, the collective accommodation for Officers and Marshals is already adapted to needs. Furthermore, some bodies hosting Operational Departments have been identified where, given the favorable infrastructural situation, priority should be given to the assignment of female military personnel; • the problems relating to the infrastructural adaptations of the working environments, given the small number of female personnel among the total workforce of the Armed Forces, can be resolved at local level; • at the Central Authorities the presence of female personnel (even if not military) has already required the adaptation of the structures.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The subsequent provision connected to the 1999 Financial Law, n. 448 of 1998, has ordered its continuation by integrating the relevant implementation rules into article 44. The resources deriving from the sale and valorisation of properties, pursuant to the provisions of the law, are paid into the State budget for Therefore, with regard to the necessary infrastructural arrangements, it was taken into account that:
As far as the recruitment of female personnel is concemed, the current orientation envisages proceeding in the Officers and Marshals categories, with a rate equal to 10% of the total positions available for competition. In this hypothesis, the annual influx for the Air Force will be approximately 20/25 units for Marshals, 10/15 for Officers, of which approximately
10 will be incorporated at the Air Force Academy and the rest through "direct appointment" competitions.
10.4.1 Divestment program The divestment program of Defense real estate assets began with the approval of the provision linked to the Finance Law for 1997, which regulated its implementation in paragraph 112 of article 3 and in the subsequent paragraph 113, regarding the right of pre-emption of local authorities.
The same happens for the program relating to the transit to Civil Aviation of airports which no longer have operational value for the AM. However, positive developments are emerging to regulate this delicate matter with a Draft Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of Defense and the Ministry of Infrastructure and Transport currently being examined by the latter Department.” As far as NATO Infrastructure Programs are concemed, the current "stalled" phase is highlighted, due to the merger of the individual Capability Packages (CP), which must be reformulated basing their content on "Military Functions" referring to a broader context of the national one.


Autonomous Provinces of Trento and Bolzano The Legislative Decree of 21 December 1998, n. 495, provides for real estate, already in use by the Defense, to be transferred to the assets of the aforementioned provinces.
In any case, the transfer operations are underway as the properties are identified and registered; which is only possible during the summer season, as they are located at high altitude, in areas normally covered in snow for most of the year. However, the most significant properties have already been transferred to the Region and within the current year the transfer of the most important asset, consisting of the Mont Blanc cable car, will be implemented.
• the identification by means of a tender, at community level, of the company with predominantly public capital having particular professional qualifications and experience in the real estate sector, to which to entrust the task of managing the divestment programme.
The complete implementation of the program required a wide series of technical-administrative obligations which entailed a complex commitment lasting over a year for the start-up phase alone. These obligations, under the responsibility of the Defense Administration, concemed: • the identification of the properties to be included in the divestment program and its approval with the decree of the President of the Council of Ministers of 11 August 1997, on the proposal of the Minister of Defense after hearing the Ministers of the Treasury and Finance (302 properties were identified);
Special Statute Region of Val d'Aosta The Prime Ministerial Decree of 8 November 1995 provides for the transfer to the Region of n. 128 properties. These are mostly artefacts located at high altitude, belonging to the former "Vallo Alpino" and not registered in the register, and for which there are difficulties in identifying the properties.
Special treatment is reserved for military properties located in the Special Statute Regions and in the provinces of Trento and Bolzano.
The main objective of the aforementioned provisions of the Law was to find financial resources using the assets in use by the Defense, but no longer necessary or responsive to modem needs, to allocate them to the Defense itself, to compensate for the reductions made to its budget following the difficult economic situation of public finances. Added to this were the secondary, but no less important, objectives relating to the rationalization of the military presence in the territory and a more profitable reuse of state property with great urban and social relevance, which can be achieved through exchanges. be reassigned, within the overall limit of 1400 billion lire, to the estimate of the Ministry of Defense, upon proposal of the same, for the achievement of the objectives of modemization and operational and infrastructural strengthening of the Armed Forces.
10.4.2 Special cases. ____________ census of assets to be ceded to Sicily and Sardinia; • the delivery of assets relating to the real estate funds of the Ministry of Finance.
• the free transfer of assets to Valle d'Aosta, Trentino Alto Adige and Friuli Venezia Giulia and the Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it a total of 12 billion. • The finalization of numerous program agreements essentially aimed at rationalizing the military presence in certain areas (Modena, Piacenza and Bologna) and the stipulation of various memoranda of understanding with local authorities (Rome, Trento, Pisa, Viterbo, Turin, Naples , Florence etc.) which will have to be developed on a technical level;
In essence, to date the divestment activity has involved: • the sale of over 100 real estate complexes for a value of approximately 150 billion, in particular the precise situation of the "sales" is as follows: n. 28 contracts already defined, for a total value of approximately 33 billion lire; n. 33 preliminary contracts signed, for a total of approximately 44 billion; n. 22 preliminary contracts prepared for signature, for approximately 30 billion; n. 7 contracts subjected to authorization examination by the Ministry of Cultural Heritage and Activities - MBAC - for a value of 20 billion; n. 10 contracts to be defined following the issue of the new MBAC regulation for Subsequently, the agreement was signed regulating the relationships between the Ministry of Defense (General Directorate of Works and State Property) and the CONSAP Company, winner of the aforementioned tender, with regards to the management of the decommissioning programme, and was appointed, by Decree of the Minister of Defense the Congruity Commission, provided for by article 3, paragraph 112, letter c), of Law 662/96, composed of a representative of the Ministries of Defence, Treasury, Finance, Public Works and an expert in possession of proven professionalism in the sector, as well as presided over by a Magistrate of the Court of Auditors.
200


Solid preparation represents the pre-condition for competing with counterpart allied organizations that have a high level of specialization and considerable experience.
These difficulties, moreover, are reflected in the activity carried out in the numerous allied fora that deal with resources, where it is essential that the visibility of the decisions taken by Italy meets criteria of absolute coherence.
Regions with Special Statute Sicily and Sardinia The Defense is preparing the lists of properties no longer necessary for its needs which will be the subject of a forthcoming joint examination at the Presidency of the Council of Ministers, Regional Affairs Department, during the revision of the statutes of the Regions in question .
Therefore, in order to optimize the use of resources, NATO conducted a profound restructuring of its bodies and modified procedures in the 1990s, achieving close integration between the NSIP, the MB and the "Manpower".
Furthermore, the importance of mutual funds and cooperation in the field of resource logistics was reiterated in the new strategic concept approved at the Washington summit in April 1999.
Friuli-Venezia Giulia Special Statute Region Legislative
Decree 24 April 2001, n. 237, provides for real estate, no longer useful for defence, to be transferred to the assets of the Friuli Region. The transfer operations have mostly already begun.
And precisely due to the breadth of the subject - which involves branches of various nature (military policy, operations, logistics, financial planning, infrastructures, telecommunications and command and control systems) - the staff action is difficult and laborious as it requires a close coordination between numerous organizational elements of the CEO, whose structure is not designed for unitary management of the programs.
The Defense, in addition to the properties listed in the aforementioned Legislative Decree, has also taken steps through the Ministry of Finance, Department of Territory, to transfer the works of the former permanent fortification to the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano.
The transfer of the aforementioned properties takes place with very simple methods, through the signing of the relevant delivery reports - by the representatives of the Ministry of Finance/Department of Land, the Ministry of Defense and the provinces involved which give the right for the registration and transfer of the properties in question in favor of the provinces themselves. The transfer operations have mostly already been completed, except for a very few properties for which they are still underway.
Despite the scale of the problem, the NATO Resources sector has so far been considered atypical, limiting knowledge to a few "insiders". On the contrary, resource issues require the adoption of national positions that often go beyond the technical-military aspects to directly affect political decisions.
10.5.2 AFSOUTH command ____________
• “Manpower” necessary to manage these programs.
In the 1990s, in order to optimize the allocation of joint military financial resources, member countries strengthened NATO's management structure, promoting the development of targeted structures and establishing a high-level resources commission: the Senior Resource Board (SRB), responsible for the overall management of NATO's military resources.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it As regards NATO programs in Italy, we recall the two main projects currently in an advanced stage: AFSOUTH 2000 in Lago Patria and JOINT COMMAND SOUTH in Verona.
At a national level, the entire sector reports to the Defense General Staff which plays a leading role in relation to the
14 Defense bodies involved in the programs in question.
Italy participates in the various programs with a share in financial and personnel terms that places it in fourth place among the Nations. intended for the construction of common infrastructures (building and communications, electronic and IT works) and the "Military Budget" (MB), which covers the operating expenses of the Alliance;
However, the individual professionalisms must be supported by an efficient and harmonious structure where the staff can work at their best.
10.5 NATO infrastructure programs 10.5.1 NATO Resources NATO resources concem the set of: • programs implemented with funds from the "NATO Security Investment Programme" (NSIP), which is 201


202 The properties belonging to the military state property, although old and in need of functional and architectural adaptations, are now incorporated by urban expansion, proving particularly suitable for guaranteeing the necessary "proximity" to citizens.
The achievement of these strategies is conditioned by the diversified property regime of the approximately 5,000 barracks in use distributed across the national territory, of which 143, equal to 2.8%, belong to the Military State Property, 865, equal to 17.4%, to the Civil State Property and 3986, equal to 79.8%, are privately owned and rented by the Ministry of the Interior.
The Defense General Staff, to carry out the tasks connected with this intervention, has set up its own local office called PA - 2000 which, included in the Joint Project Coordination Office, constitutes the natural interface between Italy and NATO.
The Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between NATO and Italy has been signed, and concrete implementation of the project is underway.
The sector policy has as its objectives the search for optimal conditions for maintaining, rationalizing and strengthening structures to make them functional and compliant with actual needs, developing housing standards based on the optimization of the cost/ effectiveness ratio.
10.6 Infrastructural problems of the Carabinieri Corps 10.6.1 Introduction The buildings, plants and structures constitute the logistical-infrastructural complex necessary to satisfy the needs of the different organizational lines into which the Corps is divided, configuring itself, due to the consequences it determines on the operation and efficiency of the Departments, as an essential component of the command organisation.
The choice of the Lago Patria site (Giugliano - Naples) was made on the basis of the operational requirements established by NATO and the availability of state-owned areas, through a complex feasibility study.
AFSOUTH is currently located in Bagnoli, in properties rented by the Banco di Napoli Foundation. The relocation and construction project of the new AFSOUTH headquarters was decided and planned by the Atlantic Alliance for an estimated cost of approximately
300 billion lire.
At the end of 1999, after having obtained NATO funding of around 60 billion lire, the Defense General Staff began a calm dialogue with the Mayor of Verona to identify altemative solutions, given that the neighboring University had insistently requested that the barracks entered into its infrastructural assets. A Declaration of Intent was signed with the Municipality, which provides for an exchange between Passalacqua and an area of approximately 30 hectares in the southem outskirts of the city, called "La Genovesa", capable of also hosting the Land Operational Forces Command . We will now have to proceed by convening a Services Conference and presenting the cost estimates to NATO. ____________
10.5.3 Joint Command South of Verona Currently the Joint Command South of Verona is divided into five locations. The relocation was started in 1994, assuming the renovation of the “Passalacqua” barracks in Verona.
On a side note, the relocation of the HF antenna park from Lago Patria to Licola and the redevelopment of the infrastructural complex of Nisida which hosts NAVSOUTH is envisaged.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
10.6.1.1 State military barracks The barracking of the Training, Mobile and Military Police Organization departments weighs on the budget of the Ministry of Defence, which commits resources allocated to specific expenditure chapters dedicated to the Carabinieri. The financial availability allows adequate interventions for new constructions, modemization and strengthening, as well as for ordinary and extraordinary maintenance of the 143 complexes currently in use.
The new Project was presented, with fully satisfactory results, to the Local Authorities during two Service Conferences and to the President of the Campania Region.
In recent decades, significant initiatives have increased the real estate stocks of the civil state property, thanks to targeted legislative funding, which have made it possible to create modem structures compliant with the changing needs of the Commands, even though they are largely now in need of necessary adjustments imposed by recent environmental regulations , accident prevention and safety for systems.
Italy, as the host country (Host Nation), is responsible not only for the implementation of the project, within the times set by the Atlantic Alliance (2005), but also for numerous other tasks such as expropriations, urbanization works, etc...
The construction, which is particularly complex and is divided into two components, Civil Works and Telecommunications, includes a main building and other support buildings, such as the Motor Pool and Community Center.


203 In view of an economic phase which affects public spending in general, a policy of targeted acquisitions of properties abandoned by the Armed Forces has been underway for some time, deemed necessary to ensure the presence of the Force in large urban areas. These initiatives, however, found real conditions in the regulatory provisions (Prime Ministerial Decree of 11 August 1997, Prime Ministerial Decree of 12 September 2000 and subsequent) aimed at the sale of properties decommissioned by the Armed Forces. In fact, among them are infrastructures adaptable to institutional needs and capable of contributing to the containment of expenditure incurred by the state budget for passive rents.
10.6.1.2 Civil state property barracks Law n.16/'85 (so-called “Botta”) allowed, through a powerful financial commitment (1,450 billion), the construction of
334 new barracks, resulting in a significant increase in the quality of the park infrastructure in use by the Army.
At the buildings of the Training Organization, characterized by architectural-structural conditioning, the adaptation works are estimated at 2 billion. about.
10.6.1.4 Acquisitions of abandoned properties by the FF.AA.
The expense for the rental of the approximately 4,000 privately owned barracks is far higher than the budget available, so much so that it has recorded a significant deficit which has led the Ministry of the Interior to temporarily freeze new infrastructure initiatives.
These sectors include the initiatives taken to adapt the structures to the needs of female staff, according to the design guidelines imposed for the new buildings, in order to guarantee indispensable conditions of "privacy" and functionality (dorms, infirmaries, services and places commonly used).
Within the annual budget allocation (approximately 600 billion) dedicated to the logistics sector, 16.67% is allocated annually to infrastructural activities and divided between the following sectors: training 8.5%, staff well-being 21 .3%, logistical support 14.7%, safety/prevention of accidents at work 14.2%, out-of-area mission needs 8.8%, miscellaneous needs 4.3% and water and electricity supply fees 28.2%.
The Cassa Depositi e Prestiti, on the initiative of the Carabinieri, has extended the possibilities of granting mortgages to Municipalities, Provincial Administrations, Consortia and Mountain Communities, as well as to the former IACP., who intend to proceed with the construction/renovation/purchase of properties to be used as barracks. ____________
10.6.1.3 Barracks in privately owned properties For the barracks of the Departments of the Territorial Organization of the Carabinieri, the Ministry of the Interior provides for the acquisition, disposal and management of the properties to be leased - where it is not possible to use state-owned structures - with an average expenditure of approximately billion. 350 per year, according to the following percentage breakdown: • premises rent and ancillary charges (cap.2663): 86.3%; • maintenance of privately owned premises and property systems (cap.2753): 8.3%; • maintenance of premises and immovable systems of civil state property (cap.2754): 5.4%.
• extraordinary maintenance and upgrading (cap.8152): 78%; • elimination of architectural barriers (cap.8156): 3.6%; • ordinary maintenance (cap.3721): 2.4%; • adjustments in compliance with the laws “L.46/'90 and 626/'94” (cap.8160): 16%.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it Percentage-wise, the gravitation of the ordinary budget resources committed annually by the Ministry of Infrastructure and Transport for the barracks used by the Army is divided into the following sectors:
The resources, allocated with Law 217/1992 and subsequent ones, allowed the financing of the new Carabinieri Marshals and Brigadiers School of Florence (441 billion of expenditure and delivery of the works in October 2001) and the setting up, adaptation and renovation of 25 closed-air shooting ranges (approximately 30 billion).
The Carabinieri does not have properties that can be disposed of, but rather urgently needs to acquire suitable infrastructures in Milan, Padua, Rome, Naples and Messina, to provide suitable logistical accommodation to the Technical-Logistic-Administrative Groups of the Interregional Carabinieri Commands being formed, as well as in Livomo for the newly established 2nd Mobile Brigade.
A further contribution was made by targeted FIO financing (approximately 158 billion) which allowed the completion of works in progress and the launch of functional lots, as part of complex building programs intended for the Carabinieri Student School of Reggio Calabria, the Carabinieri Region Calabria and at the “Palidoro” Carabinieri Mobile and Specialized Unit Command in Rome.


request and for the subsequent authorization for the temporary disposal of the asset;
Ultimately, given the situation outlined above, it is currently possible to examine only the requests referring to premises located in non-disposable properties, provided that the necessary conditions connected both with their suitability to satisfy the specific needs and with the needs regarding infrastructure safety (easily enucleable premises).
In this framework it seems appropriate for the Associations to unify, so that in the various locations assets that cannot otherwise be sold and are suitable for the specific need are identified, to be dedicated in their entirety as headquarters for the Associations.
The procedural process currently adopted in the Defense sector is in line with the above. This process in particular provides that: • the Armed Forces General Staff are responsible for verifying the possibility of satisfying the Currently, following the restructuring process of the Defense Bodies, entire real estate complexes have become available in many cities for which requests for partial acquisition are received from the said Bodies. In this regard, it should be noted that, following the innovations introduced by Law 662/96 regarding the sale/exchange/development of state property, the Defense has long since started a program of disposal of its real estate assets which requires the complete availability of the properties in the their entirety, also to avoid causing a decrease in value and to avoid possible disputes with the dealers which, inevitably, would be an obstacle to the sale/exchange/enhancement of the goods themselves.
10.7 Concession of state-owned military premises to Armed Forces and Fighter Associations Article 1, paragraph 1, of Law no. 11 July 1986. 390 gives the Financial Administration the power to grant or lease state-owned and state property, even temporarily, for a period not exceeding nineteen years, for a period not exceeding nineteen years, which cannot even temporarily be used for govemment purposes. These concessions/leases are granted and stipulated for an annual reconnaissance fee of no less than one hundred thousand lire and no more than 10% of that determined by the UTE of the Ministry of Finance on the basis of market values. Article 5, paragraph 8 of the subsequent law of 29 September 1995 n.507 extended the application of the provisions of Law 390/1986 also to
fighting and military associations and to amateur associations, delegating to a specific Decree of the Minister of Finance their identification. In this regard, in 1996, the Cabinet of the Minister of Defense sent the list of combat and military associations to MINIFINANZE. Subsequently, a regulation was adopted in order to establish specific criteria for the identification of fighting and weapons associations and amateur associations to which the provisions of Law no. 390/1986.
• the General Management of Works is responsible for the technical improvement and subsequent "activation" of MINIFINANCE. ____________ The above, for example, is already being implemented in Bressanone (BZ) in the “Bauzano” Palace by numerous local associations. In fact, these Associations are forming a single legally recognized "figure" as the sole interlocutor for contractual purposes and for technical-administrative aspects.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it 204


11.2 DEFENSE ACTIVITIES FOR ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
PART XI
11.1 Interventions in favor of the community
11.1.1 General information 11.1.2 Decision-making authority
11.1.3 Constraints 11.1.4 The contribution of the individual FF.AA. and the Carabinieri
11.1.4.1 Army - Natural disasters - Safeguarding free institutions - Public utilities - Strikes - Undermining of Bailey bridges - Clearance of explosive devices - Demolition of illegal buildings - Forest fire prevention campaign - Meteomont
Service 11.1.4.2 Navy
11.1.4.3 Air Force 11.1 .4.4 Carabinieri
11.1 INTERVENTIONS IN FAVOR OF THE COMMUNITY.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
11.2.5.1 Activities of the technical-industrial area
11.2.5.2 Activities of the Army
11.2.5.3 Activities of the Navy
11.2.5.4 Activities of the Air Force
11.2.5.5 Activities of the Carabinieri
11.1.1 General information The competitions provided by the Armed Forces are subordinated to their institutional priority commitments. They consist in the use of personnel, means and materials in tasks that are the same or similar to those normally carried out within the Military Organization. The role of the Armed Forces is to be considered complementary to that played by the Dicasteries and civil organizations institutionally responsible for the various sectors of intervention. ____________
• Law 382/1978 "Principle rules on military discipline" which, in defining the competences of the Armed Forces, establishes that the task of the Army, Navy and Air Force is also to contribute to the protection of free institutions and to the good of the national community in cases of public disasters;
• the Circ. SMD-G-006 "Directives for military competitions in peacetime" ed. 1991, which defines the methods of intervention, the rules to be followed, specifies the limits of the delegation of the Minister's Cabinet to the MS of FA and reports the methods for reimbursement of financial charges;
11.2.1 Previous
11.2.2 Policy and programs 11.2.2.1 Accident Prevention and Environment Office 11.2.2.2 Joint Forces Working Group 11.2.2.3 The "Guidelines" of the Ministry of Defense 11.2.2.4 The Joint Environmental Directive 11.2.2.5 Training and training of personnel 11.2.2.6 The determination of the organization
11.2.3 Military cooperation Italy – USA 11.2.4 Contribution to environmental protection NATO 11.2.5 Recent environmental protection activity
ARMED FORCES AND THE COUNTRY The type of commitments in the competition sector is regulated by specific legislative provisions and directives of the Ministry of Defense and the MS of Defense and FA, which define procedures, operating methods, dependencies and limits of the commitment.
Among these it is worth mentioning:
205


• intervention in water emergencies on the smaller islands of the ordinary statute regions; • interventions in a hyperbaric chamber for barotrauma patients and oxygen therapy; • interventions on the marine environment to protect fauna, flora and water monitoring, marine environmental research activities and exchange of information and data on climatological matters; • planning, carrying out courses and training activities on civil-military cooperation; • transport by military vehicles.
• contribution of personnel and resources to the administrations institutionally responsible for safeguarding human life on land and at sea; • restoration of main and secondary roads; • carrying out operations to combat marine pollution from hydrocarbons and other agents; • hydrooceanographic and aerial photogrammetric survey of areas of interest and production of the related cartographic support, as well as exchange of information, documents and data of a geotopographic and geodetic nature; o forest firefighting campaign and firefighting interventions even outside of said campaign; o emissions of meteorological data; o issuing periodic bulletins relating to risk - avalanches; o nuclear, biological and chemical detection and carrying out the related remediation interventions; o consultancy to administrations and bodies regarding planning and intervention of the Forces (1) Intervention, upon request, is provided for the following activities:
In particular, the Head of SMD coordinates and decides based on the directives of the Minister of Defense, after consulting the Heads of SM of FA.
11.1.2 Decision-making authority For competitions that require coordinated interventions between the Armed Forces, the decision-making authority goes back to the SMD. •
• Law 225/1992 "Establishment of the National Civil Protection Service", which regulates the entire sector at a national level.
Article 6 clearly specifies that the various State Administrations provide civil protection activities according to their respective regulations and competences ; Legislative Decree 464/1997 “Structural reform of the Armed Forces.” which in article 5 lists the competitions that the Armed Forces can provide in the sectors of public utility and environmental protection(1);
Provision of services to private individuals may be authorized for consideration if there is at least an indirect interest of the Armed Forces or if the civil State Authority, responsible for protecting the interest that occurs, makes an express reasoned request. In the latter, among other things, the impossibility of resorting to other means to satisfy the need must be certified. ____________ And it establishes that they are granted at various levels: • on the initiative for immediate competitions and for saving human lives; • at the request of the civil authorities to whom institutional responsibility for the interventions is entrusted, in cases of insufficiency of means, materials and personnel dependent on them such as to certainly highlight the impossibility for said authorities to satisfy the need on their own .
In particular, the aforementioned publication SMD-G-006 "Directives for Peacetime Military Competitions", specifies the types of competition envisaged: • safeguarding free institutions; • safeguarding human life; • public disasters; • public utility.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it the Armed Forces, also includes those specific in circumstances of public disasters.
• Law 331/2000 "Regulations for the establishment of the professional military service", which, among the tasks for Similar coordination is carried out by the Office of the Secretary General of Defence/DNA when the interventions concem the technical-administrative area.
Armed forces in situations of national emergency;
206


• military units must be employed directly under their respective hierarchical commanders pre-eminent interest of the Defense Administration;
11.1.3 Constraints Some constraints apply to the granting of competitions by the Armed Forces to the civil authorities, which it
is considered appropriate to mention: the earthquake in the Umbria-Marche Apennines (1997 – 98), where the commitment reached the maximum consistency of 750 men and 215 various vehicles operating in the earthquake area, accumulating a contribution to the Civil Protection of 34,600 over the course of the activity youth/man; landslide and flood phenomena in various locations in Campania, with activities that began on 5 May 1998, concentrated in the municipalities of Siano, Samo, Lauro, Diecici and, marginally, Nola with initial activities of searching for missing persons and immediate support for the population, which excavation, removal and transport of debris were added later. The activity involved a tumover of 3,400 workers. and a maximum daily presence of
600 men (without considering personnel on rest shifts), 223 various vehicles, 45 earthmoving machines and 55
tipper trucks, equal to:
Among the most recent interventions, the following have taken on particular importance:
In any case, if the requests are of particular political or social relevance, the prior notice of the Minister's Cabinet must be obtained, following the reasoned opinion of the MS or the Office of the General Secretary/DNA, competent regarding the perceived political-social implications and the feasibility of the competition.
• involve the assumption of the burdens by the beneficiary organisation, except for certain activities
• the use of military personnel must be in keeping with the prestige of the uniform and the men, materials and means used must be - respectively in terms of professional preparation and technical characteristics - suitable to meet the need and must exclude any participation for of pure labour;
Competitions in the event of strikes and public order, secondments of military personnel to other Administrations as well as competitions in favor of Armed Forces Associations and Combatives. For these eventualities, the procedures in force remain confirmed.
• in the intervention of specialized units, especially engineering, transmissions and the Air Cavalry; • in the supply of materials (medicines, food, blankets and barracks, etc.).
The FA SMs, within the framework of the specific delegation granted to them by the Minister of Defense and, on the basis of the criteria of general stability, operate to satisfy the various competition needs, maintaining a close connection with the operational centers of the other FF. AA.. the protection of personnel, means and materials used in competitions;
Supplied;
The Army, making use of the organization already present in the territory, is able to guarantee interventions at an increasing level of specialization depending on the situation, which take the form: • in the use of the departments, reporting directly to the respective Commanders, with the means and equipment ____________
• involve the implementation of suitable measures by the local Prefecture concemed to guarantee More recently, in the autumn of 2000 and in the following winter months, the Peninsula was affected by bad weather phenomena which created widespread and, at times, prolonged flood emergencies. These emergencies, in particular,
occurred: as soon as possible with civilian resources;
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
11.1.4 The contribution of the individual FF.AA. and of the Carabinieri 11.1.4.1 Army Natural disasters Relief for the population affected by natural disasters is a specific task of the civil authorities who organise, implement and direct it, using all the resources at their disposal.
• must be authorized by the competent Defense Administration Authority, except in the case of "Immediate" interventions implemented on the initiative of local Commanders.
• they must be temporary; the personnel, vehicles and materials supplied must be replaced or 700,000 m3 of mud and debris and 300 tons. of various materials transported; or 26,800 tons. of materials transported; or 20,000 packaged meals. that operational; responsible; • •
• must not affect the fulfillment of the departments' priority institutional tasks, whether training or training 207


208 This legal capacity has given greater incisiveness to the action of the Army units, which have been able to operate in full autonomy with the typical methods of the Police Forces, maintaining their Command and Control structures unchanged.
Among these, the Govemment's decision to attribute to the FA soldiers - with a specific legislative provision - the qualification of "Public Security Agent" stands out due to its exceptional nature, clearly differentiating the recent operations from all those carried out previously. allowed them to "proceed with the identification and immediate on-site searches of people and means of transport, pursuant to art. 4 of Law 152/75(3), also for the purpose of preventing or impeding behavior that may endanger the safety of people or the safety of infrastructures or monitored places, with the exclusion of judicial police functions". • in Northem Italy, in October - December 2000, due to similar circumstances which involved 7 regions, up to 2000 men and 450 vehicles operated per day (including 20 earthmoving machines and 8 helicopters, which accumulated approximately 150 hours of flight); in Sicily, in the period 23 July - 23 August 2001, where the Army provided a significant contribution to stemming the lava flows on the erupting Etna.
It was an employment which saw the direct participation of the military departments in the preventive and repressive action of the Police Forces and required the adoption of particular measures both on an institutional and organizational level. of the overflowing of a stream which had involved the "Le Giare" campsite, with the use of 25 units, 1 helicopter,
7 vehicles and 3 earthmoving machines. Subsequently, in the first fortnight of October 2000, the FA intervened in over 10 different locations affected by the calamitous events, simultaneously deploying up to 116 men, 50 various vehicles and 5 teams of engineers for earthworks; in Calabria: between 10 and 18 September 2000, in the municipality of Soverato (CZ) following The interventions were mainly aimed at fighting organized crime, following the intensification of criminal incidents in some regions, and at controlling the phenomenon of illegal immigration at the Italian borders. • Since that date, in fact, the national political authorities have decided to increasingly involve the Army in conjunction with the Police Forces to contribute to the protection of intemal security, as a suitable instrument for strengthening the presence of the State in particularly critical areas of the Nation. ____________ These commitments, which fall within the institutional activities envisaged by Law 382/1978 "Principle rules on military discipline" which, among the tasks established for the Army, Navy and Air Force, also includes that of "contributing to the safeguarding of free Institutions”, have followed one another since July 1992 at a fast pace, constituting an onerous testing ground for all units of the Armed Forces.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it • L. 331/2000, where in art. 1, paragraph 5, it is provided that “the FF.AA. contribute to the protection of free institutions and carry out specific tasks in circumstances of public disasters and in other cases of extraordinary necessity and urgency"; L. of 26 March
2001 n. 128 (so-called "security package"), which institutionalized the intervention of the Armed Forces. in case of specific and exceptional needs, in order to allow Police Force personnel to be employed in the direct fight against crime (previously for each competition of this type a specific legislative provision was necessary). On the basis of the aforementioned law, the Council of Ministers, on the proposal of the President of the Council of Ministers, in agreement with the Ministers of the Interior and Defense, adopts one or more programs for the use, by the Prefects, of military units for the surveillance and control of fixed objectives, such as institutional buildings and others of public interest. These programs, lasting a maximum of six months (renewable), are adopted Safeguarding of free institutions In addition to its commitments in the intemational field, since 1945 the Army has also been interested in various interventions at home in collaboration with the Public Security Authorities (2), for the safeguarding of public order and safety in certain areas of the country characterized by events that could have harmful consequences for the community. • Recently, two legislative measures have even more "regularized" this form of intervention: • (2) art.13 of Law 1st April. 1981, n. 121: the Prefect has the Public Force and other forces possibly placed at his disposal based on the laws in force and coordinates their activities;


The Army normally, upon delegation from the SM of Defence, coordinates the activity of the three Armed Forces, which is carried out with the split use of the departments, localized or generalized on the national territory in relation to the type of event (referendum , political, regional, provincial and/or municipal elections). This activity, from 1997 to today, has seen the use of: - 1997: 27,119 units;
- 1998: 2,924
units; - 1999:
12,573 units; - 2000: 8,880 units; - 2001: 9,194 u.. ____________
• Strikes The FA can help guarantee the functioning of services of community interest with the use of: ol Personnel specialized in the public transport sector. o A specific agreement regulates the recruitment of RGT personnel. railway genius at the TRENITALIA Company. The regiment ensures participation in railway operation activities (entire national network) and construction of railway infrastructures. In these commitments the staff uses plants/vehicles/infrastructures of the TRENITALIA Company, to which the railway responsibility for the activities dates back; o Veterinary Officers, in relation to the type of need (municipal slaughterhouses, fish markets);
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it A particular form of intervention consists of the commitment during electoral consultations, where the FA contributes to the section supervision service implemented by the Ministry of the Interior, under the exclusive responsibility of the Public Security Authorities. (4) The Minister of the Interior presides over the National Committee for Public Order and Security (CNOSP), responsible for examining any issue of a general nature relating to the protection of public order and security and conceming the organization and of the Police Forces. The CNOSP is a consultancy body composed of an Undersecretary of State for the Interior, the Chief of Police, the General Commanders of the Carabinieri and the Financial Police and the Director General of the Penitentiary Administration (they can intervene, if requested, also the delegates of the
FF.AA.). having consulted the National Committee for Public Order and Security (4), in which the Head of SM of the FA concemed is called upon to participate, and define the maximum numerical commitment of military personnel that can be used in each province and the related employment directives . In this context, the military, in order to prevent or prevent behavior that may endanger the safety of people or the safety of supervised structures, can proceed to identify and detain people/ vehicles on site for the time strictly necessary to allow the intervention of Police Force Agents (under no circumstances will the military be able to have the functions of Police Force Agents).
Public utility Uses for public utility are related to needs that are not always clearly configurable a priori and may concem replacement interventions in the event of strikes in public services and other needs of various kinds (transport activities, restoration of road and railway traffic, water supply, blasting of explosive devices, services of personnel, vehicles and materials for sporting needs, etc.). (3) The art. 4 of law no. 152/1975 “Provisions for the protection of public order” provides that “in exceptional cases of necessity and urgency, which do not allow a timely provision by the judicial authority, the officials and agents of the judicial police and the public force during operations police may proceed, in addition to identification, to an immediate search on the spot, for the sole purpose of ascertaining the possible possession of weapons, explosives and break-in tools, of people whose attitude or presence, in relation to specific and concrete circumstances of place and time do not appear justifiable. In the case referred to in the previous paragraph, the search can be extended for the same purposes to the means of transport used by the above-mentioned people to reach the location. A report must be drawn up of the searches provided for in the previous paragraphs, on a specific form which must be sent to the Public Prosecutor within 48 hours and, in the case provided for in the first paragraph, delivered to the interested party".
209


justice"; or disposition of the Public Prosecutor's Office, pursuant to Royal Decree 12/1941, for "needs of Casting of Bailey bridges
• Meteomont service At the request of the Prefectures, ground departments can also be used (of the order of 2 companies), usually limited to the daytime period, for the excavation of trench fronts or for felling trees, for cleaning the undergrowth and emergency assistance. any bums/wounded people, provided that they do not act in direct contact with the fire. o Helicopters for emergency medical transport (as well as organs for transplants), mountain rescue and transport of special loads. equipment, the procedures in force and the characteristics of the buildings to be demolished, can take place on:
The activity carried out by the Engineering departments within the feasibility limits imposed by the equipment in
September 2001);
The aircraft, during the months of greatest risk (Feb. - Apr.; Jun. - Sep.), are temporarily assigned to PRO.CIV. and employed directly with simplified procedures by the Air Force Command of the Air Force, which coordinates missions at unit level on behalf of the Unified Air Operations Center of PRO.CIV. (on average over 400 hours/flight per year). o Tankers for water supply (8 vehicles operated in Sicily in the period June - One type of competition that the Army has been involved in for some years is that relating to the demolition of illegal buildings, required if it is not possible to carry out the demolition work according to normal administrative procedures. The interventions are carried out in a security framework guaranteed by the Police Forces (preventive clearing of buildings and disconnection of domestic gas, electricity, water and telephone utilities; evacuation of the affected area, interruption of traffic).
The FA's competition for the forest firefighting campaign is carried out with the availability of helicopters for fire interventions, possibly redeployed on bases throughout the national territory to allow greater timeliness in action, included within the framework put in place by the Department of Civil Protection .
• Competition for the forest fire prevention campaign ____________
• Demolition of illegal buildings Explosive ordnance clearance includes the complex of activities aimed at searching, locating, identifying, discovering, examining, deactivating, removing or neutralizing any explosive device. The interventions, in relation to the purpose they set for the competition purposes, include: o occasional clean-up, for reasons connected with the protection of human life or public utility, following the discovery of explosive devices found on the surface or partially buried.
Occasional clean-ups are carried out daily by the bomb squad of the Engineering departments (in 2000, 4,030 interventions were carried out, equal to 11 interventions/day); o systematic clean-up, for preventive purposes in areas where the presence of buried or undetectable explosives is presumed. These are activities normally entrusted to civilian companies specialized in the sector, making use of the technical support of the FA (Military Engineering Directorates and Engineering Commands).
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
On 20 March 1998, an agreement was stipulated with the Ministry of Public Works for the repression of illegal construction on private land, implementing Financial Law 662/96, which integrates the provisions of Law 47/1985 and makes procedures simpler. of the intervention. ol decision of the "Central Technical Committee", at the request of the Prefects, which also includes a representative of the Defense (GENIODIFE), established pursuant to Law 203/1991, for illegal artefacts created on public land (state property and state assets) .
• Clearance of explosive devices and/or war remnants The FA, for the needs of public utilities and/or natural disasters, provides for the dumping of material from the Bailey bridge in favor of the Public Administrations, upon request of the Prefectures, following a reconnaissance to verify the technical feasibility of the intervention (at 69 bridges are currently under construction across the entire national territory). or the request of the Mayors pursuant to Law 47/1985, through the Prefects for the repression of illegal construction on public and private land. Demolitions on private land are subject to the evaluation of a Regional Committee in which a representative of the FOD Command competent for the territory participates; • 210


As regards this last aspect, the Alpine Troop Command has long established effective cooperation with numerous civil bodies interested in the issues in question and among these they have a position of particular interest:
related and integrated. In particular: the forecasting activity, carried out through the issuing of a daily meteorological forecast and snow assessment bulletin; teaching, management and control activities in the sector of safety and rescue in the winter mountains and on the ski slopes; training activities, such as: qualification course for meteorological observers for the staff of the Alpine Troops and the State Forestry Corps; course for rescuers on ski slopes for the staff of the Alpine Troops and the State Forestry Corps; course on avalanche detection and prediction techniques for foreign military personnel; research, studies and experiences relating to the environment and phenomena connected with snow and avalanches; participation of managers in conferences and seminars, in Italy and abroad, of interest in the specific sector; production and updating of Military Avalanche Cartography and special cartography (altimetric, clivometric and exposure maps); collaboration and participation in the activities carried out by the bodies responsible for Civil Protection, the environment and regional and provincial services; meteorological support at home and abroad for the units engaged in training/operational activities.
The Service is currently based on the following constituent bodies: o the Alpine Troop Command in Bolzano, with managerial, organizational, coordination and the Universities, such as the Faculty of Agriculture of Turin and the Faculty of Motor Sciences of the University of Perugia with which some educational collaborations have been started. • o “Meteomont” pursues its objectives through the development of multiple activities, among them for all those who live in the mountain environment or frequent it for work and/or tourism reasons. or the Data Collection Center at the Air Force Meteorological Center of Milan-Linate, for the collection, compilation and distribution of meteorological information, based on the data provided by the Air Force Meteorological Service.
Today Meteomont fits into the broader context of the concept of prevention, safety and rescue • The Meteomont Service, bom within the Alpine Troops in the winter of 1972/73, with the collaboration of the Air Force, to guarantee the Alpine departments a framework of maximum safety in mountain activities, especially in winter ones, has become increasingly important on a national level. covered by the detection network; the Ministry of the Environment and the Department of Civil Protection; the Regions and Autonomous Provinces associated with the AINe.Va., whose collaboration takes the form of the exchange of information acquired from the respective monitoring networks, opinions and comparisons on the snow situation, the unitary management of some monitoring stations and the elaboration of the avalanche mapping; for the drafting of bulletins and the safety of very low altitude flights; ____________ ol Extraordinary detection units, for the collection of meteorological information in non-local areas ol a Meteonivometric Monitoring Network currently made up of 48 automatic and 57 manual stations, for the acquisition of daily and periodic observations and measurements. The territorial distribution of the network has been defined, in agreement with the regional and provincial bodies, in order to guarantee widespread coverage of the areas subject to snow control and integration with the civil networks;
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it • • check;
Bressanone, Belluno and Udine) covering the entire Alpine range and Abruzzo, responsible for the organization and implementation of the service in their respective areas of competence; the State Forestry Corps, which manages autonomously, but in close technical and functional coordination, meteorological forecasting activities along the Apennine arc; with the Air Force for the exchange of meteorological information • o 6 Meteomont Sector Centers (Turin with the sub-centre of L'Aquila, Aosta, Bolzano, 211


11.1.4.2 Navy The functions carried out by the Navy within the framework of the relationship between the Armed Forces and the country derive from the needs of public security, environmental protection, protection of economic activities at sea and public utility, with the use of the potential of military structures .
An index of the considerable interest aroused by the activities carried out by the Meteomont Service is given by the number of contacts on the relevant website (www.meteomont.it) which during the winter season reaches up to
500 contacts/day.
In relation to the evolution taking place in the Armed Forces and the intemational missions in progress, the criteria followed for the granting of competitions - without prejudice to the maximum availability ensured within the limits of available personnel and material resources - will increasingly tend to favor the use of units with a strong specialist connotation (engineers and helicopters) which are normally not available in the civilian sector. firefighting with helicopters, medical and traumatized transport with helicopters, the decommissioning of unexploded war remnants by specialist units, the hydrographic service and the Lighthouses and Maritime Signals service.
The validity of the safety and prevention system put in place by the Meteomont Service has been confirmed in recent years, especially in the civil world, with the start of numerous collaborations with public and private bodies and various information bodies including RAI, RAI -CCISS and numerous periodical magazines (Airone, Rivista della Montagna, etc.).
Other significant interventions in favor of the community also concem the water supply to the smaller islands (approximately 200,000 cubic meters per year), rescue and assistance during natural disasters, the summary of competitions provided by the army ____________ As part of the general maritime police activities, the MM carries out control activities on merchant shipping, including visits and inspections of documentation and cargo.
Conclusions The FA cannot, due to priority operational needs, bind itself to preventive commitments, without prejudice to its availability to intervene with the adherence allowed by its device and with qualified modules within the feasibility limits imposed by the equipment supplied and the procedures in force .
Among these functions, those with a strong operational connotation concem general surveillance and control at sea, the control of clandestine immigration flows (through devices in the waters of the lower Adriatic and the Otranto Channel, in the Northem Ionian Sea and in the Sicilian Channel ), the supervision of economic activities and the protection of fishing freedom (through the surveillance and protection of national fishing vessels operating in the critical areas of the Sicilian channel and the Adriatic Sea), search and rescue at sea (intervening with its own " guard units for saving human lives at sea", especially in complex operations on the high seas also with the use of offshore patrol vessels equipped with the capacity for the maritime rescue service), the protection and control of underwater archaeological assets (through the use of specialized means to support activities to safeguard the maritime environmental heritage and archaeological research), the protection of the marine environment and the fight against marine pollution.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The maintenance and development of the aforementioned collaborations, the scientific and technological progress in the meteorological field and the progressive transition from a conscript Army to an Army on a voluntary basis, with consequent lower availability and high cost of human resources, today require a substantial updating and strengthening of the systems for acquiring, transmitting, archiving and processing the meteorological data that make up the "Meteomont system", according to new criteria, such as: • updating the software and hardware currently making up the system; • transition from the current data reception and transmission system, via radio/wire, to more efficient and economical systems (e.g. satellite and digital); • the replacement of the fixed manual detection network with new automatic stations, providing for an enhancement of the current automatic network by 50%, equal to 24 stations, with the consequent substantial reduction of the staff employed by approximately 60%.
11.1.4.3 Air Force The Air Force offers a significant contribution in the sector, with particular reference, for example, to fire extinguishing campaigns through in-flight vehicles and with the contribution of its personnel, vehicles and structures. This contribution is also made possible thanks to a uniform distribution of the installations 212


of the Navy Hydrographic Institute for: o the creation of thematic cartography relating to land use occupation, urbanisation, woodland, hydrography; o the census of natural resources; o the control of physical phenomena and the stability of monuments and works of art; o training of personnel in the geotopographic sector;
Assistance in the event of disasters is ensured by all the Carabinieri organizations and in particular by the territorial garrisons. In fact, due to its widespread presence across the territory, the Institution is often responsible for carrying out the first aid intervention or organizing resources on site immediately after the event. or the effectuation of reliefs idrocartografico and of the realization of relative maps to zones of particular environmental interest;
11.1.4.4 Carabinieri The role played in the sector by the Carabinieri is of particular importance, as art. 3 of Legislative Decree 297/2000 indicates: “as the national civil protection operational structure, pursuant to law 24 February 1992, n. 225, provides as a priority to ensure the continuity of the institution's service in areas affected by public disasters. It also contributes to providing assistance to populations affected by calamitous events".
• of the Military Geographic Institute (IGM) for:
In particular, the competition was requested:
Finally, it is worth remembering the complex of traditional supports provided by the AM, both to the country and to other public administration departments, with the carrying out of activities relating to ATS (Air Traffic Services) services rendered to civil and the weather service. This specific task is carried out with seamless activities throughout the day through a widespread network of meteorological detection stations and processing and forecasts by the General Meteorology Office. A further segment of support for activities of interest to the country is also provided with the execution of aerial photogrammetric survey missions which, in a broader context of environmental policy, provides a highly effective tool for the specific interest of the nation. or aeronautical on the national territory. As part of the relationship between the FF.AA. and the country, particular and significant importance is assumed by the search and rescue activity of shipwrecked and missing people which is carried out by means of systems/ platforms in daily alarm conditions. This specific activity also involves the carrying out of medical flights and, more generally, the broad-spectrum rescue activity for the benefit of populations in the event of public disasters and emergencies. This function with an eminent operational characteristic is also carried out in favor and in support of the Public Security authorities such as the FA's contribution provided previously and during the recent G-8 Summit in Genoa. In this circumstance, in fact, the FA ensured the creation of an "umbrella" to protect the entire area affected by the event from the aerial threat.
In 1987, following the creation of the Ministry of the Environment, Defense was called upon to provide support to the new Administration in very different areas with the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding which established a list of areas of cooperation with the individual Forces Armed in the field of environmental protection. the creation and installation, in the design phase of the new hydro-oceanographic units, of structures and equipment aimed at carrying out environmental research; part of systematic survey programs carried out by hydro-oceanographic units; ____________
11.2.1 Background Before the reorganization of the top management of the Ministry of Defence, carried out in 1997, responsibility for environmental protection resided in each individual Armed Force and was often dealt with in different sectors such as accident prevention or NBC defence. •
11.2 Defense activities for environmental protection Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it or • The work carried out by the territorial commands is integrated by that of the components of the other organisations. or of the emergency both in terms of actual first aid and in terms of management and organization of the resources available to deal with the event. the use of the results of the marine environmental research plans being carried out of the Aeronautical Geo-topographic Information Center for: training of personnel in the marine environmental research sector;
In this context, Station Commanders are often called upon to offer their work for initial management 213


Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it or or or Subsequently, in 1995, an agreement was finalized with the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, with which the "State Forestry Corps" undertook to provide the technical-scientific support necessary to improve the environmental aspect of those non-military areas directly used for training activities. of the School of Aerocooperation of Guidonia for the training of personnel in the photo-interpretation sector; of the Air Force
Meteorological Service for: the climatic evaluation of particular areas; the identification of atmospheric conditions favorable to the occurrence of dangerous events for civil activities, with possible environmental impact (fires, rainfall, etc.); the use of information necessary for the control and prediction of air pollution;
of the Meteomont Service for:
of the Armed Forces in general for: the environmental monitoring service; actions for the recovery and restoration of areas of environmental value, as well as prevention, protection and enhancement of the environment; the study and solution of specific technical environmental protection problems associated with military activities.
• the competitions that the CEO must provide have been sanctioned, as well as in the field of civil protection
• a specific "memorandum of understanding" has been prepared between the Ministries of Defence, the Environment and Agricultural and Forestry Policies for the use and conservative maintenance of non-state-owned training areas and occasional ranges in national, regional or in areas subject to environmental protection. A draft of the aforementioned protocol was drawn up in the summer of 1998 by the SMD and proposed to the other two Dicasteries. or • • •
11.2.2 Policy and programs ____________ or from the environmental monitoring of pollutants of the Health Services and Commissariat of the Armed Forces for: analytical investigations on water and food contaminated by chemical and/or biological agents; diagnostic and evaluation tests on humans for damage resulting from contamination; the determination of the permanent elements of environmental pollution on foods; the assessment of pollution of product substances of animal and plant origin; or With the enactment of Legislative Decree no. 464/97:
• compliance with national laws and adaptation to NATO standards; • pollution prevention; • nature conservation; • management of hazardous materials; the use of aerial photographs and orthographies; the collection of data of environmental interest from air carriers; atmospheric and other parameters with environmental impact; the detection of pollution rates or atmospheric and radioactivity; radioactivity; • or ol the preparation of avalanche monographs; o examining the stability of the snowpack and controlling avalanches; or in the field of environmental protection;
Stimulated by these events, the Defense General Staff has started the development of a Defense environmental policy, a joint work program and a dedicated management system which are structured around the following key points: the monitoring of sulfur dioxide and • meteorological data or 214


• The Subgroup for the development of environmental protection in military installations has produced, in cooperation with the USA, a questionnaire for the cognitive reconnaissance of all the activities taking place in military bases for the purpose of identifying any polluted sites and preventing pollution. pollution. This questionnaire is being distributed to all peripheral defense bodies as an aid in identifying polluted sites, in implementation of Art. 17 of the Environment Ministerial Decree n.22/97.
To confirm the importance attributed to environmental protection issues, the Defense General Staff felt the need to raise the Environment Section to Office level by inserting the treatment of accident prevention matters which are similar in some respects.
11.2.2.1 Establishment of the accident prevention and environment office The first step was the creation of a Regulatory and Environment Section which was initially set up to address all those environmental impact problems linked to military infrastructures. As the activities progressed, the Section became the coordination point for all aspects of environmental protection within the Defense sector.
The Subgroup for noise protection is developing an implementing regulation of the framework law on noise pollution (L. 447/95), relating to the noise produced by military aircraft. By virtue of the experience gained by the Air Force with the MILNOISE project and with the creation of a mobile vehicle for noise detection (total cost of the project 1 billion), the Subgroup is providing assistance to local authorities for the purposes of noise mapping provided for by the aforementioned law.
The Subgroup for the protection from electromagnetic pollution to address the buming problem of non-ionizing radiation. Also in anticipation of the future approval of a framework law on the subject, the Subgroup has already produced a first draft of the "Joint Regulation for the Protection from Non-Ionizing Radiation", which will be further improved to include the provisions of Legislative Decree 626/94 and subsequent modifications.
However, the development of such a program requires financial and personnel resources that are not immediately available.
Furthermore, the Defense General Staff has planned a series of actions, with the intention of implementing them together with the activities within NATO and within the Bilateral Cooperation with the United States of America: • establishment of an Accident Prevention and Environment Office ; • establishment of a joint working group for environmental protection; • development of an Environmental Policy of the Ministry of Defence; • definition of a Joint Environmental Directive; • staff training and training; • determination of the organization. •
• environmental cleaning and recovery.
In dealing with every aspect relating to environmental protection, the Group has established four working subgroups to deal with specific topics.
The Subgroup for information, education and environmental training of personnel which is developing, in cooperation with the USA, programs for the awareness, specialization and cultural elevation in the field of environmental protection of military personnel of all levels;
Army where to start collecting information on environmental problems and experimenting with possible solutions: ____________ coming from the following sectors: • technical-operational of each Armed Force; • technical-administrative of the Ministry of Defense; • technical-specialist, when deemed necessary.
It is for this reason that an Interagency Working Group composed of representatives was established Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it For the quality improvement activity, a pilot installation has been identified for each Force • However, the development of an environmental policy and programs for Defense requires the contribution of all Armed Forces SMs and bodies in the technical-administrative area, not only for reasons of inter-force standardization but also and above all to acquire and integrate the experiences gained in each Armed Force.
11.2.2.2 The joint working group • The Office is now the point of reference for national and NATO environmental planning, for cooperation with other ministries and local bodies and with the US Department of Defense for environmental issues.
215


• February 1999 - Brochure "Environmental protection in the military sector - The competition of the Armed Forces for the Protection of the Mediterranean Black Sea System". Printed in 200,000 copies and distributed widely, especially at schools and defense recruitment centres; • 15 June 1999 in Rome at the CASD – Italy-USA Conference “Environmental protection
• 14 September 1998 in Florence - Italy - USA Conference on environmental protection in the military sector (participants approximately 100 Officers/civilians of the three Armed Forces, Colonel rank or equivalent, coming from all over Italy);
It had its first definition with the approval by the Committee of Chiefs of Staff, on 9 December 1998, of the relevant "Guidelines".
11.2.4 Contribution to NATO environmental protection As regards NATO standardization, it is worth specifying that Italian foreign policy involves participation in multinational forces, including in out-of-area operations, which implies training and exercises in Italy and abroad. These activities cannot ignore the laws in force in the host nations. In 1998, the need to standardize doctrine for joint environmental protection during military operations was agreed upon among most NATO countries. Therefore, within the "Joint Service Board" (JSB) of the "NATO Standardization Agency" (NSA) a Working Group on Following the signing of a Letter of Intent at a political level, a Steering Committee was established for the exchange of information on environmental issues and four working groups on the same topics as the aforementioned working subgroups.
11.2.2.3 The "Guidelines" of the Ministry of Defense Armies at work for the Mediterranean Black Sea System”;
• 19 March 1998 at the Military Academy of Modena – Conference by Prof. Mario PAVAN on “The Forces •
In 1997, U.S. Air Force Civil Engineer Acting Maj. Gen. Eugene LUPIA, held an interesting conference at the Defense General Staff on the environmental protection programs underway in his Armed Forces. This, in practice, began bilateral Italy-United States of America cooperation in this field.
In addition to participation in various courses, conferences, seminars in Italy and abroad, as well as the publication of some articles in military magazines, some notable achievements in this delicate sector should be mentioned:
The Hazardous Materials Subgroup recently formed to address one of the most sensitive sectors of environmental protection.
11.2.3 Italy-US military cooperation in the environmental field
11.2.2.6 The determination of the organization was affected by two limiting factors: the restructuring of the Armed Forces and the downsizing of the workforce. However, in consideration of the importance and sensitivity of the matter, the Committee of Chiefs of Staff still wanted to start the activities, including environmental protection in the competences of the Defense accident prevention organisation, also for reasons of affinity. ____________
11.2.2.5 Staff education and training are considered essential to the development of any environmental policy and programme.
• provide a unitary reference framework and joint environmental protection forces; • illustrate the Environmental Policy of the Ministry of Defence; • outline the environmental program for the following two years; • issue directives on environmental protection.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
• participation in various courses and conferences at intemational and NATO level also with the contribution of speakers.
The Directive aims to:
11.2.2.4 The Joint Environmental Directive With this document the Defense General Staff intends to provide an overall framework of intemational, community, national, behavioral, information and guidelines standards to facilitate the carrying out of military activities in compliance with national laws to safeguard the environment and adapt to NATO standards. in Defense Administration”;
These guidelines were subsequently developed into a more complete document currently being approved by the Minister of Defence.
216


the conservation and protection of the particular habitat (moorland);
• collaboration with the “Vauda” National Park Authority, which includes the Cirié (TO) polygon area, for The environmental issue is therefore vast and complex and with a high number of topics that will engage the EPWG in long and arduous work and in close collaboration with other groups, national and NATO, operating in different sectors.
It is expected that, in the future, the activities of the EPWG will have a considerable development to allow the Alliance to keep pace with the increasingly precautionary environmental protection measures issued by member countries.
The actions underway/planned by the General Directorate of Naval Armaments, in agreement with the Naval General Staff concem: urban and special solid waste; harmful solid waste;
In the specific naval sector, the competent General Management has long undertaken a demanding program of modemization/adaptation of all naval vessels in line. The point of constant reference is represented by MARPOL, whose limits for the spillage of polluting products into the sea, although they do not apply to state ships, represent the minimum objective that the Navy wants to achieve and maintain. In particular, the problems to reduce the environmental impact of waste produced on board during normal operational activity were examined.
Environmental protection has long since become a fundamental parameter in both the planning and conduct of military operations and is expressed in the most varied scenarios: from simple national exercises to complex multinational operations outside the area. This standardization will facilitate NATO Commanders in planning and conducting military operations and training. of the Torre Astura area, an integral part of the Military District;
• agreement between the Ministry of Defense and the Municipality of Nettuno (Rome) for landscape protection The EPWG, currently made up of representatives from twelve nations, has already met twice at NATO Headquarters in Brussels; the Presidency of the group was entrusted to Italy. The ratification draft will be submitted to the member countries for definitive approval by the end of 2001, constituting the first real step towards a common military environmental policy. The Italian presidency was particularly appreciated for achieving the set objectives and was reconfirmed unanimously. • environmental protection the "Environmental Protection Working Group" (EPWG) which had the task of developing STANAG 7141-EP, the basic document of environmental doctrine and any other more specific STANAG.
11.2.5.1 Activities of the technical-industrial area From a general point of view, we note the careful attention on the part of the bodies of the technical-industrial area in the application of the legislation on environmental protection which takes the form of the activation of services and
agreements with different purposes:
NBC;
• collaboration of the aforementioned plant with the Ministry of the Environment and with the Institute for Scientific and Technological Research Applied to the Sea, as part of the ACAB project, relating to the problem of chemical weapons sunk in the lower Adriatic; research and development activity aimed at identifying ecologically compatible technologies, production procedures or storage and transport systems. ____________
11.2.5 Recent environmental protection activities The most recent activities reported by the Armed Forces in the field of environmental protection are listed below.
• Identify military experts to support various pilot studies.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
• collaboration with the ASL of Civitavecchia regarding the development of biological control methods for hospital environments; • clearance of explosive devices in the national and intemational territory; • remediation of the territory from aggressive chemicals by the Military Defense Materials Establishment • Superior of Health);
• designate a national military coordinator to work alongside the civilian coordinator (appointed by the Institute
• in the aforementioned Cirié polygon, an intense clean-up campaign was launched from waste accumulated over the years, together with an access management plan in order to control possible anthropic pressures; activities of detection and monitoring of environmental and microclimatic parameters in the workplace, as well as safe management, also for the purposes of environmental protection, of chemical weapons residues by the Technical Military Chemical Physical Biological Center of Civitavecchia in favor of Bodies and Departments of the Defence; • • Again within NATO, for a profitable participation of the Defense Administration in the work of the Committee for the Challenges of the Modem Society, the following steps were taken:
217


o collaboration with the CNR-IMA (Institute for Applied Mathematics) of Genoa for the o activities in the Ligurian and northem Tyrrhenian Sea in collaboration with SACLANTCEN and other national bodies (ICRANI, ENEA, CNR and Genoa Aquarium) in order to census the cetaceans in the "whale sanctuary";
For years the Army has contributed its helicopters and personnel to the fight against forest fires. pine-wooded areas of relevance in the province of Taranto. o MARIDIPART TARANTO carried out a campaign against the pine processionary moth in the determination of the hydrogeological characteristics of the Ligurian Sea;
There are many other state-owned areas managed by the Army which, due to the way in which they have been protected and preserved, are of considerable naturalistic importance. o activities in the Gulf of Naples and Pozzuoli in collaboration with the University of Pisa (department of marine geophysics), for the tracking of the vertical tomography of the thermal layer of the earth's crust necessary to verify the conditions of the magma chamber of Vesuvius; o collaboration with the Naval University Institute of Naples for the construction of a digital bathythermal map of the Gulf of Naples; o collaboration with the University of Genoa (Department of Marine Environmental Sciences) for the
11.2.5.2 Army Activities The Army manages the following ranges located in Parks or Protected Areas: • “Le Ripe” – Gran Sasso and Monti della Laga Park; • “Monte Stabbiata” – Gran Sasso and Monti della Laga Park; • “Monte Ruzza” – Gran Sasso and Monti della Laga Park; • “Marane” – Maiella Park; • “Monte Manfriana” – Pollino Park; • “Passo Rotta dei Cavalli” – Foreste Casentinesi National Park; • “Torre di Nebbia” - Alta Murgia National Park; • “Masseria Signoritti” - Gargano National Park; • “Lago Bianco” - Dolomite Park.
XBT/CTD instrumentation in the waters off the port of Brindisi.
• oily bilge water; • gray and black water; • chlorofluorocarbons and Halons; • atmospheric emissions. digital format, scale 1:225,000; o research activities and environmental surveys, by means of MM hydrographic units, with hydro-oceanographic in the areas of interest of the Hydrographic Institute; ____________ detail: "mammelone" area in front of the Tunisian coast). o activities in the Ligurian Sea in collaboration with the University of Genoa for an environmental study on the state of the sea around the wreck of the HAVEN oil tanker, which sank in 1992 in the waters off Arenzano (GE); o elaboration for the National Seismic Service of a bathythermal map of the Italian seas, in Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it Spice; o processing for the National Geological Service for the supply of a bathythermal map at 1:50,000 scale in DXF format of the sea area in front of Montalto di Castro and Tarquinia; o determination of some marine environmental parameters during the carrying out of the campaigns or in the mapping of posidonia meadows, by CIM units (mine hunters); these units also carried out the campaign of collection and destruction of war devices discharged into the sea during air operations over the former Yugoslavia, as well as helping to search for archaeological finds at sea; o fishing supervision in marine areas intended for the repopulation of certain fish species (in
• Operational and study or competition activities, on a non-interference basis using the units underway for monitoring and prevention activities from hydrocarbon pollution and reporting sightings of large cetaceans; development of three-dimensional models of the seabed in the Ligurian Sea area; o magnetothermic research in the Gulf of Naples in collaboration with the University Consortium of
11.2.5.3 Navy Activities 218


Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it MARISICILIA: Calderini Lighthouse (SR), Punta Spadillo Lighthouse (Island or Maddalena, SS); or Pellegrino (PA), decommissioned for some time; or MARISARDEGNA: Santo Stefano naval base and La archipelago they fall in areas subject to hydrogeological constraints. or Stefano (La Maddalena, SS) in cooperation with US Navy Naval Support Activity; design of the water lifting system of the second dock of the Arsenale district of La Spezia for introduction into the canal or MILNOISE project Bom from the collaboration between the Air Force and the Italian Center for Aerospace Research (CIRA), the project aims to create a system for the prediction and evaluation of acoustic impact based on a mathematical model.
The monitoring of the areas will be carried out through microphone chains connected to instruments which, in addition to measuring the intensity of the noise, will be able to analyze it in all audible frequencies at the same moment in which it is produced. The collaboration between Defense and the Friuli Region fits into this framework Reclamation activities on areas in use or to be abandoned the reclamation of the 3rd and 4th Group of tanks already decommissioned; • or design of special waste storage area inside Once developed, the model will provide the distribution of noise on the territory according to the parameters that will be set from time to time, reflecting specific operational and environmental situations, without the need to carry out long and expensive field surveys.
MARIDIPART LA SPEZIA: Tino Island, Palmaria Island and former Fort of M. ____________ • or San Francesco, S. Bon and Rotina. or S. Maria di Portovenere (SP); of the Arsenal of La Spezia;
11.2.5.4 Air Force Activities ol acoustic characterization of aircraft; o development of a noise impact procedure; o evaluation of the noise impact on Pratica di Mare airport; or specific technical training of personnel.
Areas of the Marina subject to ecological constraints Muzzerone, located near Portovenere (SP); TLC station of La Castellana, Cinque Terre area (SP), TLC station and NATO CMM range of the former Punta Bianca battery, Ameglia area (SP) - TLC station of La Rocchetta, Lerici area (SP); Portofino lighthouse
(GE);
MARIGENIMIL AUGUSTA has completed the study phase for • MARIDIPART TARANTO: all the areas in use or decommissioned or Pantelleria), Aeolian Islands, Egadi Islands; or the reclamation of the illegal landfills of the former batteries has been completed maintenance of the purification system at the S. base disposal/tidying up of general warehouses in Bonaria (CA); design of the consolidation intervention of the cliffs of Isola del Tino (SP), subjected to flaking/ landslides; recovery and redevelopment of the former Garibaldi battery on the tip Lagora, in order to keep the flow rate constant during lean periods; or Maddalena, Tavolara Island; the reclamation of the former Monte naphta depot is under study "La Porta" fuel depot in Trapani; PES battery of Villamarina (Guardia del Turco, La or hydrogeological examination of the springs in the La Spezia Arsenal area, aimed at the subsequent hamessing and environmental redevelopment of the areas involved.
The program is divided into the following parts:
The detection of noise pollution levels will be carried out using the aforementioned mobile noise detection device, created at the 2nd AM Motor Vehicle Maintenance Group. The new vehicle is capable of carrying out noise measurements in the vicinity of military airports and identifying any corrective actions aimed at reducing noise pollution.
219


• Flight activities to help fight forest fires The aforementioned MILNOISE project on aircraft noise, developed by the Flight Experimental Center of Pratica di Mare, is part of a broader strategy aimed at containing noise pollution caused by the training flight activity of the Air Force. • the Aeronautical Health Service ensures the carrying out of the control activities required by current regulations regarding the potability of water, disposal of toxic and harmful waste, for the needs of Armed Forces Agencies/Departments; • The Interministerial Decree of 9 November 1992 establishes the contribution of the Defense Administration with its own resources and personnel to the National Scientific and Technological Research Programs in Antarctica (PNRA), the implementation of which is entrusted to ENEA. In particular, the Air Force ensures logistical support which takes the form of the availability of personnel from the Meteorology Center and doctors, and of a C130 aircraft for carrying out approximately 10 flights for the transport of material and personnel from New Zealand to Antarctica on the occasion of the annual expedition. To date, the AM has contributed with: l 9 campaigns for a total of approximately 3500 flight hours; l the activation in the Newfoundland Bay of a Meteorological Office for the assistance of air and naval vehicles and of the expedition itself and of a Meteorological Station included in the global meteorological telecommunications network of the World Meteorological Organisation; l the participation of the CAAM staff of Monte Cimone, specialists in CO2 observations, upon specific request from ENEA. • Reduction of airbome noise Fiumicino and Bari, an Environmental Control Section has been established, whose tasks include carrying out chemical-physical controls in the ecological-environmental field;
Venezia Giulia for the acoustic mapping of military airports created within the Joint Committee of the same Region.
Antarctica Project at the three Technical Control Laboratories of Padua,
Furthermore: ____________ • Monitoring of meteorological and environmental data The Air Force carries out a significant monitoring activity of meteorological and environmental data as part of collaborations with the National Environmental Protection Agency, Civil Protection, Ministry of the Interior, Ministry of Transport Infrastructure, Magistrate of the Po and of the Province of Milan, as well as of the Ministry of the Environment in implementation of the aforementioned 1987 Memorandum of Understanding.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
From 1978 to 2000, the Air Force carried out 7,228 hours of flight for training activities and 15,400 hours of flight for operational activities for a total of 22,628 hours of flight. Two flight crews lost their lives in this activity.
In the years 1984-86, the Presidency of the Council of Ministers carried out programs for the acquisition of aircraft to be managed by the AM. These programs, called "Protex 84" and "Protex 86", allowed the acquisition of 3 and 2 G222 aircraft respectively, for Civil Protection needs. For the contractual obligations and subsequent management of the air assets, the Presidency of the Council stipulated a specific agreement with the Ministry of Defense (DI 16
January 1989).
Consequently, since the Armed Force must ensure the indispensable activity of combat aircraft necessary for the achievement and maintenance of an adequate level of training, actions have been initiated and contacts have been made with foreign countries aimed at carrying out low-altitude flight activities in environments and territories not subject to limitations.
These limitations have, in fact, decreased the areas available and increased the minimum quotas, making the BBQ activity severely penalized.
For years the Air Force has provided its contribution with aircraft and personnel to safeguard the forestry heritage.
This activity began in 1978, with the C130 aircraft of the 46th Air Brigade and, subsequently, the support was integrated by G222 aircraft of the same brigade, by the CL215 "Canadair" and by the HH3F helicopters of the 15th Wing. In 1987, the Canadairs were retumed to the Ministry of Civil Protection. • Again in order to contain the noise produced by military aircraft during training activities within acceptable limits, the Air Force has imposed limitations on very low altitude (BBQ) flights on national territory.
220


The “Environment Project” concems, first of all, the creation of a “Data Bank” (so-called “Flag project”) The main objective of the project is to strengthen territorial control through the use of advanced technologies that qualify the prevention and fight against attacks on the environment. This is with the aim of enhancing the organizational module of the Carabinieri Environment Protection Command which, with the establishment of specialized Sections at regional level, aims to deepen, at a local level, knowledge of the problems of interest and to provide activities of prevention and repression carried out by the Territorial Armed Forces, providing more timely and effective support.
In particular, the census of the Army sites potentially polluted due to previous anthropic, logistical-operational activities has been completed, activating the procedures for temporary safety measures aimed at subsequent clean-up, and the definition of a specific protocol is awaited. of agreement between the Departments of the Environment and Defense regarding the times in which the aforementioned sites must be reclaimed, according to a national-level program which also includes the allocation of specific resources.
• project of the NATO Committee for Challenges to Modem Society (NATO - CCMS) on illegal activities connected to radioactive materials, reporting, through the Carabinieri Environment Protection Command, the
11.2.5.5 Activities of the Carabinieri The Carabinieri in tum contributes to the development of the Defense Environmental Policy within the objectives set by the Defense Environmental Directive.
The Operational Program "Security for the development of Southem Italy" 2000-2006, in a perspective aimed at strengthening the technologies in use by the FF.PP., at the qualification, training and updating of personnel, at a full and effective involvement of the civil society, sees the Army engaged in the implementation, among others, of the "Environment" project (Measure I.3.) for which it is responsible.
Furthermore, the Carabinieri Command for the Protection of the Environment is the "national point of contact" within Europol for the trafficking of radioactive material. • The General Command of the Carabinieri also contributes to: for over ten years the Aeronautical Geotopographic Information Center of Pratica di Mare has been carrying out, upon request of central and local authorities, support action with the supply of topographic data and photo interpretation also for environmental protection purposes.
The Department has tumed its attention to some primary objectives such as: coastal areas (Operation Clean Sea), Purifiers (Operation Census and Control of Purifiers); landfills; areas and companies at risk; investigations into quarries and illegal building construction that cannot be remedied, etc.
At the Carabinieri stations in the territories included in the so-called "Objective 1" special telephone alert systems for environmental protection will also be activated.
• multimedia data processing, integrated with thematic cartography and geographical mapping (satellite and aerial), to the full advantage of the analysis and planning of targeted operational interventions. ____________ The Department, made up of highly specialized personnel in the field of environmental legislation and culture, is equipped with specific inspection powers and carries out judicial police functions in environmental matters with the exclusion of technical checks, for which it makes use of the National Health Service and, for the more complex ones, of the Istituto Superiore di Sanità and the Carabinieri Scientific Investigations Group, within which an environmental chemistry section operates.
Furthermore, as regards the specific activities of the Carabinieri in environmental matters, it is certainly worth mentioning the operation, since 1986, of the Carabinieri Command for the Protection of the Environment, recently strengthened and structured into: a Command, based in Rome; a Central Operational Section, within which the "Radioactive Substances Pollution Team" is set up; sixteen detached Sections.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
• the acquisition of constantly updated information using advanced technology equipment designed for the detection of polluting sources or sources of environmental risk, as well as for the taking of images from terrestrial platforms and in the air;
The project will also allow us to strengthen the control of areas at risk thanks to:
Finally, the General Command ensures the participation of its qualified Officers in the Joint Working Group for the development of Environmental Protection, as the body responsible for specific tasks and responsibilities, as well as the coordination of the activities of each Armed Force in the field of Environmental Protection .
In the following years, this activity will be progressively extended to all educational institutions. managed by the Carabinieri Environment Protection Command and also accessible to the other Police Forces, to the State Forestry Corps, to the National and Regional Agencies for the Protection of the Environment, and finally to the Regions, with a view to full coordination of activities to protect the Environment.
Already from the current academic year, special information seminars on the topic of environmental protection in the Armed Forces are planned at the Carabinieri Officers School, as a common factor for all training courses.
221


Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it ____________ • information of interest that may emerge from the work of the "Environmental Crimes Project" within the G-8; to the "National network for the detection of radioactive fallout", established with law n.421/1996, for the strengthening of measures to prevent the dangers of pollution from radioactive substances, through a program of adaptation and replacement of the plants and equipment control and monitoring used by the National Fire Brigade, as some telemeasurement sites are located at the Army's headquarters.
222


12.5.1 Historical notes and institutional tasks 12.5.2 Research, transfer and definitive arrangement of the Italian Fallen
12.5 GENERAL COMMISSIONER HONORS TO THE FALLEN IN WAR
AND WEAPONS, THE MILITARY MUSEUMS, THE GENERAL COMMISSIONER,
ARMED FORCES, FIGHTING ASSOCIATIONS
12.4.2 Army Museums
12.4.2.1 Historical Museum of the
Infantry 12.4.2.2 Historical Museum of the Grenadiers of Sardinia 12.4.2.3 Historical Museum of the Bersaglieri 12.4.2.4 National Historical Museum of the Alpini 12.4.2.5 Historical Museum of the Cavalry 12.4.2.6 Historical Museum of the Artillery 12.4.2.7 Historical Museum of the Engineer Corps
12.4.2.8 Historical Museum of the
Motorization 12.4.3 Museums of the Navy: 12.4.3.1 Historical Naval Museum 12.4.3.2 Naval Technical Museum
12.4.4 Historical Museum of the Air Force 12.4 .5 Historical Museum of the Carabinieri
12.4 MILITARY MUSEUMS
12.4.1 General a.
Shrine of the flags at the Vittoriano
MILITARY PUBLICITY, SPORTS ACTIVITY IN
PART XII
12.3 COMBAT ASSOCIATIONS ____________
12.2.6 Budgetary charges
12.2.7 Armed Forces-Coni agreements
12.2.5.1 Army sports centers
12.2.5.2 Navy sports centers 12.2.5.3 Air Force sports centers 12.2.5.4 Carabinieri sports centers Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
12.2 SPORTS ACTIVITY IN THE ARMED FORCES 12.2.1 General information 12.2.2 Mass physical activity 12.2.3 Conservative activity for competitive sports 12.2.4 Conservative activity for executives 12.2.5 The sports centers of FF.AA.
12.1 MILITARY PUBLICITY 12.1.1 General information 12.1.2 Purposes
12.1.3 Publicity in the joint forces area
12.1.4 Publicity in the Armed Forces area
12.1.4.1 Army
12.1.4.2 Navy
12.1.4.3 Air Force
12.1.4.4 Carabinieri
12.1.5 Communication 12.1.5.1
Introduction 12.1.5.2 The current communication structure of the Armed Forces 12.1.5.3 The information and communication activity of the Public Administrations
12.5.3 Infrastructure
12.5.4 State matters 12.5.5 Miscellaneous
12.5.5.1 Relations with Associations
HONORS TO THE FALLEN IN WAR 223


As regards publications in the joint forces field, the published publications are listed below: - “DEFENSE INFORMATION”, periodical published by the Defense General Staff; - “JOURNAL OF MILITARY MEDICINE”, periodical published by the General Directorate of Military Health; - “BONUS MILES CHRISTI”, periodical published by the Military Ordinariate; - “DOCUMENTATION SIGNAL BULLETIN”, published by the Secretary General of Defence/National Director of Armaments.
The use of one's own "Official Web Site" - www.difesa.it - allows the image of Defense in general, of the General Secretariat of Defense and of the individual Armed Forces to be presented extemally - www.sgd.difesa.it ; www.marina.difesa.it; www.aeronautica.difesa.it; www.carabinieri.it; - as well as making a rapid and effective interface with the military world available to citizens.
12.1.2 Aims Military joumalism must: • address outside its own sphere to stimulate the conscious participation of citizens in military activities in the country; • tum intemal attention to managers with particular emphasis on the youngest through various projects In tum, the Chief of the Defense Ministry takes care of the SMD's public relations and coordinates the delegated ones overall, i.e. those falling within the specific competence of the Heads of the Armed Forces. It also issues directives regarding historical documentation and maintains relations with the information bodies, in coordination with the competent offices of the Ministry.
From this perspective, the adoption of the Intemet has satisfied the need to conform to modem communication systems in addition to the still valid "printed paper".
12.1.3 Publicity in the joint forces area The relationship with an informed public opinion minimizes the risks of misunderstanding in strategic choices regarding Security and Defense.
12.1 Military publications 12.1.1 General information Based on the provisions of the Presidential Decree of 25 October 1999 n. 556 “Regulation implementing the art. 10 of Law 18
February 1997, n. 25, conceming the duties of military leaders", it is up to the Minister of Defense to issue directives on communication, public information and promotion activities in favor of the Armed Forces. o strengthen the awareness that the Armed Forces are a great reservoir of technical, scientific, human and cultural resources at the service of the Nation and act as a catalyst for intellectual synergies.
12.5.5.2
Museums 12.5.5.3 Publications and audio visuals The periodic publications divided by Armed Forces are listed below. ____________ and the civil one; o encourage the process of osmosis of ideas and experiences between the Armed Forces and the military world Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it In the field of military joumalism, an important place is occupied by the Historical Offices which, in addition to dealing with the acquisition and conservation of documentation relating to the life of the Armed Forces, also play an important role in the field of dissemination of military history, through productions editorials.
12.1.4 Publicity in the Armed Forces Area The communication and information activities of the Armed Forces are carried out not only through programs foreseen for non-advertising institutional communication, but also through posters, promotional distributions, the organization of events (sporting, cultural, etc.), participation in specialist exhibitions, fairs and conferences, collaboration in the production of films for television and cinema, the organization of conferences (including at schools).
State; o promote interdisciplinary training paths; o stimulate and encourage intellectual growth and the exchange of ideas; o identify and develop the pedagogical themes and inspiring principles of ethics, life and www.aiuto.difesa.it;
cultural aimed at:
224


The Italian Armed Forces find themselves having to deal with a tradition of prejudicial distrust towards the military institution and the military function itself. But, at the same time, the new tasks, ranging from immigration control to peace-keeping missions, have induced profound changes and given the military world a strong visibility. The new commitments of the Armed Forces create the conditions for a different consideration, also by the press which is particularly interested in military missions abroad.
In the era of real-time television information and visual technologies connected to the planet of information technology, it is risky to launch any type of military initiative without guaranteeing its media recognition, such as not only to allow it to gather consensus, but also to allow it to real-time management of events.
Marina.
Add to this the increasingly massive strategic position that the media acquire within military operations.
Communication, as is known, is a strategic resource both with respect to the operations themselves and with respect to the consensus that they must receive from public opinion.
12.1.4.3 Aeronautics • “RIVISTA AERONAUTICA”, periodical published by the Air Force General Staff; • “FLIGHT SAFETY”, periodical published by the Flight Safety Inspectorate; • “JOURNAL OF AERONAUTICAL METEOROLOGY”, periodical published by the General Office for
12.1.5 Communication
12.1.5.1 Introduction The transition from compulsory conscription to volunteering, and therefore to Armed Forces made up of professionals, has imposed a high increase in communication and propaganda activity in particular.
12.1.4.2 Navy • “RIVISTA MARITTIMA”, periodical published by the Navy General Staff; • “NAVY NEWS”, periodical published by the Naval General Staff; • “ARCHIVE BULLETIN OF THE HISTORICAL OFFICE”, periodical published by the Historical Office of
12.1.4.1 Army • “MILITARY MAGAZINE”, periodical published by the Army Advertising Centre; • “BULLETIN OF THE ARCHIVE OF THE HISTORICAL OFFICE”, periodical published by the Historical Office of the Army General Staff.
General of the Carabinieri.
Each territorial Public Information structure, while acting according to the directives given by the respective General Staff, or by the immediately higher Command (in any case always subject to approval by the central bodies), enjoys a certain autonomy in the territory of its competence. In fact, in addition to promotional activities for recruitment, it also manages relations with public information bodies at a local level. The territorial press officer has the task of communicating directly with joumalists and therefore giving the answers they expect in real time.
• “OPERATIONAL ACTIVITY OF THE CARABINIERI”, publication published by the Command ____________ Carabinieri;
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The branching of the Network across the national territory is implemented within the pre-existing organizational structure in which each Agency, Section or Office is directly dependent on the immediately superior Command Body.
12.1.5.2 The current communication structure of the Armed Forces In defining the new organizational structure of the Defense, ample space was dedicated to the creation of a Public Information and Recruitment Promotion Network created to take care of the image of the Armed Forces and the promotion of recruitments.
• “IL CARABINIERE”, periodical published by the editorial body for the Carabinieri; • “REVIEW OF THE CARABINIERI WEAPON”, periodical published by the Carabinieri Officers' school; • “SERVICE FOR STOLEN WORKS OF ART”, bulletin published by the General Command of the Army of
12.1.4.4 Carabinieri This is why the military must review their way of communicating, acquiring the tools necessary to professionally manage the "mission" that intemational needs and the Nation require of them. Likewise, an increasingly higher level of professionalism is also indispensable at a national level and indeed is required by those laws that have recently revolutionized the way of understanding institutional communication.
Meteorology.
225


12.1.5.3 The information and communication activity of the Public Administrations The performance, by the Public Administrations, of information and communication activities was taken into consideration by the legislator with Legislative Decree 3 February 1993, n. 29.
Information from the Secretary General/DNA.
Furthermore, it coordinates the entire Defense editorial activity by monitoring and authorizing, on behalf of the Minister, the publication of articles in Military magazines; prepares documentary sheets on the occasion of interventions by the Minister in Italy or abroad; index - subject to approval by the Minister - press conferences, seminars, conferences; examines and authorizes requests for collaboration and participation of personnel and resources made by radio and television networks and cinematographic companies, and coordinates, subject to the approval of the Minister, initiatives aimed at increasing interest in the country in the problems and activities of the Armed Forces.
Public Information of the General Secretariat of Defence/DNA is part of the Public Service The Press Office, divided into five Sections and a Secretariat, carries out various tasks. First of all, it promptly informs the Minister and the Head of Cabinet on the news reported by national and foreign media outlets; prepares the daily press review; processes and coordinates news of military interest for the "Televideo" and "Intemet" service, regulating the methods and times of publication; prepares and disseminates press releases, news and statements regarding the Minister; ensures information action relating to the Minister's activities in the national, intemational and NATO fields; directs and coordinates, according to the Minister's directives, the Public Information activity of the Ministry, also making use of the central and peripheral Public Information Bodies of the Armed Forces.
The components of the Armed Forces depend on the UPI and therefore on the Chief of Defense Staff: the Public Information Agency (API) for the Army, the Office for Extemal Relations Documentation of Promotional Activities (REDAP) for the Navy, the Office Public Information for the Air Force and the Public Information Office for the Carabinieri.
The Head of the Press Office of the Minister's Cabinet is the Head of the Public Information Service of the Ministry of Defense and, as such, issues provisions in the public information sector and guides the public information activity of the central and peripheral bodies.
With the new structure of the Cabinet of the Minister of Defence, the role of an office in direct collaboration with the Minister himself as responsible for defense communication policy.
Public Information of the Armed Forces reports to the Public Information Office of the Defense General Staff (UPI) which, among other things, takes care of operational public information and produces the magazine "Information of the Defense".
The Peripheral Bodies (Press Officers of High Commands and other Bodies), on the other hand, deal with news published by the local press of political and/or military interest at a national level, and/or which strictly concem the technical-military activity of the Commands and Peripheral Bodies. ____________ The Central Bodies deal with news regarding the activities of the Chiefs of Staff, the General Secretary/DNA and the Armed Forces as a whole; disseminate press releases, denials or clarifications, subject to authorization from the Minister; they participate in exhibition activities at a national and intemational level and collaborate with bodies, institutes and organizations for the development of statistical, historical, sociological and scientific studies conceming the Armed Forces.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it For this to happen, the Central Bodies and the Peripheral Bodies of Public Information in the Defense sector must comply with specific directives and carry out the required tasks.
Very often, the news disseminated by public information bodies takes on a political value, involving the competence and responsibility of the Head of the Dicastery. Hence the need for coordination capable of moving the information process from the center to the periphery and vice versa, according to a process in which the Authority is constantly informed on all communication activities and, if necessary, issues the required authorization documents.
The ordinary legislator, also in order to implement the principles of transparency and effectiveness of administrative action, subsequently intervened with the law of 7 June 2000, n. 150 “Discipline of information and communication activities of Public Administrations”, published in the Official Joumal no. 136 of 13 June 2000. Law 150 establishes the rules which the Public Administration must comply with in Finally, it submits national initiatives for promotional activities in favor of recruitment to the Minister for approval; the requests for interviews with the Chiefs of Staff and the Top Management of the Armed Forces and all the initiatives proposed by the General Staff in the field of Public Information.
226


In France, the Ministry of Defense has given Public Information a leading role by establishing, on 27 July 1998, the DICoD (Delegation for the Information and Communication of the Defense department) with the specific task of strengthening the link between public opinion and the Armed Forces, to promote the image of the latter, to coordinate and disseminate information and communications relating In Germany, IP is delegated to PAOs (Public Affairs Officers, there are 28 throughout the country) who are the territorial spokespersons (Military Districts, HQs, Military Regions and Schools). To be designated PAO, Officers must have full command of the English language and have attended a specific course consisting of six weeks at the Academy for Information and Communication (AIK) + 4 weeks of practice in newspapers, TV and radio.
The structure of the Implementing Regulation, approved with Presidential Decree no. 422 of 21 September 2001, is therefore divided into two directions: the regime when fully operational (24 months after the entry into force of the regulation), which concems the qualifications that will be necessary to staff to be used for information and communication activities; the transitional discipline, which concems the training activities prescribed for those who, despite already carrying out institutional communication activities, and therefore having a certain experience in the sector, do not however possess the cognitive tools, adequately updated, to carry out their duties with the development of new communication techniques.
The law aims to ensure that the staff assigned to the press offices and public relations offices acquire a high level of professionalism while allowing the Public Administration to have, intemally, the human resources adequate for communication tasks.
For completeness, it seems appropriate to mention the different level of preparation of PI personnel in two European countries.
The approval of Law 150/2000 and the issuing of the consequent Implementing Regulation therefore entail the need for a timely adaptation of the Public Information structures of the Ministry of Defence. Currently, in fact, apart from a few exceptions, in the Defense press offices only a very limited number of Officers possess the requirements established by law and the personnel to be employed in the press offices are taken from other functions/specialisations and "transferred" without receiving any prior training . The problem of the lack of training also concems the figures of the directors responsible for the Armed Forces magazines. The anomaly was filled, in agreement with the National Order of Joumalists, by resorting to registration in a Special List of Responsible Editors not registered in the register of the Order itself which, however, has repeatedly recommended the regularization of the position .
The law, also having to address the regulation of the requirements that public personnel must possess in order to carry out information and communication functions, has delegated this task to a regulatory source. The art. 5 has in fact provided for the adoption of a regulation to identify the qualifications for access by personnel to be used for information and communication activities and to regulate training interventions for those personnel who already carry out the said activities. preparation and communication of information to citizens, both by identifying forms, tools, communication products and training methods, and by regulating the structures of the offices responsible for communication activities.
Finally, the joumalistic specificity of the job of press officer presupposes knowledge of the world of information, especially that of the market. And this knowledge is not only based on the daily vision of agencies and newspapers or television news, but also requires the ability to perceive the trend lines of joumalism, i.e. the editorial policies that are at the origin of the "information product". ____________
• carrying out the same profession, albeit in different fields, offers the two sides, that of service information and that of market information, a common ground, also technical-cultural, which facilitates the relationship. Furthermore, it allows you to identify and implement targeted "communication strategies" in the face of contingent problems or long-term events.
• registration with a professional association gives him more "bargaining power" and greater autonomy, especially in relations with the top management of the administration to which he belongs who, more often than not, have no experience in the field of institutional communication;
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The debate over whether or not certain tasks should be performed by joumalists long predates the law. It is widely believed that a joumalist can better play the role of the press officer, above all for two reasons:
National Joumalists' Association. The requirement of registration in the Joumalists' Register is required for the Head of the Press Office and for those who assist him in the exercise of institutional functions.
The art. 9 of law 150/2000 states that the Press Offices are made up of registered personnel 227


Naturally this "conservative" activity allows the most gifted young people to be selected also for participation in military competitive activities planned at national and intemational level.
This is valid, in this phase of transition to the professional Armed Forces, also for soldiers still serving in the military service.
Consequently, sporting activity must represent a constant to maintain the fighter's physical fitness. sports disciplines, of which 111 male and 14 female athletes belonging to the 9 Sports Groups of the Armed Forces and Police Forces.
Games of the 27th Olympiad SYDNEY (AUSTRALIA) 15 September - 1 October 2000 125 athletes "in uniform" participated in the 2000 Sydney Olympics, who took part in 18 The athletes deemed by CONI to be of "clear national interest", who perform military service, are gathered at the Joint Sports Centers and/or the CAGSE (Army Sports Gymnastics Training Center) where intense sporting activity is practiced in the various sectors of interest using qualified technicians and appropriate equipment.
12.2 Sports activity in the Armed Forces 12.2.1 General Physical preparation constitutes the basic element for military training.
12.2.3 Conservative activity for competitive sports In the immediate future, France plans to open an Institute for the education and training of all its personnel in the field of IP with particular attention to personnel (military and joumalists) who will then be employed in the operational theater.
Furthermore, to these 58 medals must be added the 13 (2 gold, 6 silver and 5 bronze), won in the "demonstration" disciplines of Canoeing/Kayaking and Rowing, thus bringing the total to 71 medals. to Defence, to represent the Ministry of Defense in relations with the media. Before being employed in IP, military personnel must have attended a theoretical-practical course at a joumalism school, passed the exams and completed an intemship period in newspapers, TV and radio.
With the 58 medals (17 gold, 20 silver and 21 bronze) won in 13 different disciplines, Italy ranked 3rd among the 77 participating nations.
Most important results obtained by Italian military athletes: Second Military World Games ZAGREB (CROATIA) 8 - 17
August 1999 The overall result of the Italian military team, participating in the 2nd edition of the Military World Games, was very positive and certainly beyond the best forecasts. ____________ It initially involves all soldiers who, through competitions in units of gradually increasing level, are selected to finally participate in the Joint Military Championships, in which thousands of young people compete in various sports disciplines every year. Below is the list of the main joint competitions held during the year.
Mass activity develops gradually, from the moment of incorporation, according to diversified programs prepared by the General Staff of each Armed Force.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
122 countries join and of which Italy has been part since 1949; • regional events in the European and Mediterranean area.
• military world championships organized by the Intemational Council of Military Sports (CISM), which
12.2.2 Mass physical activity In this context, gymnastic activity in the Armed Forces has been divided into two categories: the mass one, which has a competitive conclusion in the military context, and the conservative one, reserved for a few elements of specific interest, which has the aim of "preserving" to the national sporting heritage the prominent athletes for the so-called "excellence" competitions.
In the intemational field, competitive activity is expressed mainly in participation in:
This objective must be pursued, gradually but continuously, starting from the initial phase of military training, to continue with a maintenance activity for the majority of soldiers and with a greater intensity for those elements who carry out highly competitive activities. level.
228
TABLE


12.2.5.3 Aeronautica Militare Sports Centers Vigna di Valle Sports Center (fencing, athletics, basketball, women's volleyball, horse riding, sailing, gymnastics).
• Rome Joint Forces Center (swimming, diving, lifesaving swimming);
• Interforce Center of Sabaudia (sailing, rowing, canoeing, naval pentathlon); • La Spezia joint force center (water polo); • La Spezia Navy Center (shooting and athletics); • Livomo Navy Center (horse riding); Sailing is also followed by the
15 Sailing Sections distributed throughout the national territory.
These tests, appropriately modulated according to age groups, concem a series of athletic performances (running, walking, jumping, free body exercises of various kinds). “ “ The individual Armed Forces, in tum, assign, on the relevant Chapters, the following funds for sporting activities:
Army 4,488,000,000 Lire Navy 1,852,061,000 Air Force 1,327,000,000
12.2.4 Conservative activity for executives The Army General Staff, as part of normal training activity, introduced, with SME-Uf.DAR Circular 1200/162.200 dated 29 March 1999, the control tests of operational efficiency for all its staff.
12.2.5.2 Navy Sports Centers Furthermore, there are 12 Military Equestrian Centers (CIM) distributed throughout the national territory, including the islands.
The figures are in themselves eloquent: over half of the medals of the entire team, won by the athletes "in uniform" (which were approximately 1/3 of the total), represents a very satisfactory balance.
12.2.6 Budgetary charges Sports activity impacts the Defense budget for: • 764,537,000 Lire for sports activity itself and the purchase of materials; • 2,000,000,000 Lire for infrastructure.
Of the 34 medals (13 gold, 8 silver and 13 bronze) won in SYDNEY by the "Blue Team", 19 (8 gold, 4 silver and
7 bronze) were placed around the necks of athletes belonging to the Sports Groups "in uniform".
• Pisa Parachuting Training and Testing Center (parachuting); • Montelibretti RSTA grouping (horse riding); • 2nd Bridge Engineers Regiment of Piacenza (powerboating); bottom);
• Rgt riding section. CC on horseback in Rome (jumping, eventing, dressage) • Carabinieri Alpine Training Center in Selva di Val Gardena (alpine sknng, cross-country sknng, bobsleigh, sledding, biathlon, snowboard). ____________ ice);
• Rome Army Sports Gymnastics Training Center (football, men's volleyball, rugby, beach volleyball, military pentathlon, duathlon, triathlon, athletics, cycling, motorcycling, orienteering, shooting, martial and combat arts, swimming); • Courmayeur Alpine Training Center (alpine sports); • Command Department of COMALP (Alpine Troop Command) of Bolzano (Hockey and other sports on Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
• Sports parachuting section 1st Regiment. CC “Tuscania” of Livomo (parachuting); • Athletics section 5th Battalion. CC “Emilia Romagna” of Bologna (athletics); • Swimming section 10th Battalion. CC “Campania” of Naples (swimming, diving, lifesaving, cross-country and long-distance swimming sign);
12.2.5.1 Army Sports Centers The FAs have Sports Centers located throughout the national territory, in particular:
12.2.5.4 Carabinieri Sports Centers • Detachment of CC Lazio Region athletes (judo, karate, modem pentathlon, triathlon, fencing, shooting “ “
12.2.5 The sports centers of the FF.AA.
229


12.4 Military Museums
12.4.1 General Military museums mean those entrusted to the management of Armed Forces personnel.
12.4.2.1 Historical Infantry Museum: ROME - Piazza S. Croce in Gerusalemme, 9. Tel. 06-12.2.7 Armed Forces-CONI Agreements In order to encourage the practice of sports by members of the Armed Forces and to maintain and increase the national sporting heritage, two agreements are active with CONI.
12.4.2 Army Museums:
2,100,000,000 Most of the Associations (list in the table) have recently been gathered into the National Permanent Council of Weapons Associations (ASSOARMA), in order to coagulate this immense moral heritage.
Further activity is manifesting itself considerably in the sector of interventions in cases of public disasters and in voluntary participation in the security service in front of schools. “ “ The chapel of the Unknown Soldier is part of the complex, in which the unidentified remains of a Soldier who fell during the First World War were buried during a solemn ceremony on 4 November 1921.
Carabinieri Furthermore, in agreement with the local administrations and with the assistance of the Ministry, they promote ceremonies and events to celebrate key moments and dates in the country's history. it preserves the War Flags of dissolved departments, of disbanded naval units, as well as the flags of military institutes and units belonging to the dissolved state Armed Corps.
The Shrine of the Flags at the Vittoriano is located in Rome in Piazza Venezia. The monumental area collects and ____________ The activity carried out by the Associations, according to the statutory provisions, tends to morally support the Armed Forces and to strengthen the bonds of solidarity between serving and retired personnel, through the holding of national, regional and provincial gatherings which involve, with interest growing, the civilian population.
The free associative phenomenon between ex-servicemen is the one that more evidently and spontaneously than any other possible cultural, promotional and propagandistic activity, reveals the deep popular roots of the Italian Armed Forces, their entirely democratic nature, their interpenetration with civic traditions and family members of Italians.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it There are also relationships between the Army Associations and military museums; in particular, it is highlighted that, within the scope of the Museums' own objectives, the staff of said Associations promotes (at said structures) knowledge of Military History, as well as the Association's own functions. to. Shrine of the Flags at the Vittoriano.
It seems appropriate to highlight that, following the recent organization of the Armed Forces, intended to distinguish the operational component from the territorial one, the Italian Army has provided a new organization for Army/Corps Museums which no longer depend on the territorially closest Operational Command ( Regiment), but rather by a Regional Territorial Command. A few exceptions have been made, when the Military Museum stands on the site of the Operational Command.
12.3 Combat and Arms Associations Tel. 06-50234262.
The second allows CONI to finance the participation in intemational and national events of national level athletes belonging to the Armed Forces, thus increasing their experience and preparation.
The military museums collect the centuries-old testimonies of a world that has characterized the evolution of the Armed Forces from its origins to the present day. The main purpose of the museums is to collect and preserve the memorabilia that help to highlight and illustrate the history of an Armed Force and its Corps in the context of the history of Italy.
12.4.2.2 Historical Museum of the Grenadiers of Sardinia: ROME - Piazza S. Croce in Gerusalemme, 9.
7027971.
The first provides that the Defense General Staff and the sports body annually finance the creation of sports infrastructures for the Armed Forces which can, if available, also be used by peripheral sports bodies.
LIST OF FIGHTING AND WEAPONS ASSOCIATIONS 230


12.4.5 Historical Museum of the Carabinieri ROME - Piazza Risorgimento,46. Tel. 06-6896696.
Vigna di Valle Airport – BRACCIANO (ROME) - Via Circumlacuale Tel. 06-99801176.
12.4.2.6 Historical Artillery Museum: TURIN Corso G. Ferraris, Tel. 011 56034061 – 011-
• dissemination of news on the Fallen, burial places, possibility of moving mortal remains; • arrangement, maintenance and custody of military shrines and cemeteries of state property in Italy; • contribution to the ordinary maintenance and custody of existing burial grounds in ITALY, for which the Italy and abroad of their remains in burial grounds;
12.4.4 Historical Museum of the Air Force:
12.4.2.5 Historical Museum of the Cavalry: PINEROLO (TO) Via Giolitti, 5. Tel. 0121-397616.
12.4.3.2 Naval Technical Museum: LA SPEZIA - Viale Amendola,1. Tel. 0187-781111.
12.4.2.4 National Historical Museum of the Alpini: TRENTO-Alpine Acropolis. Tel 0461-827248.
• census of the burials of Italian war dead, research and final arrangement
12.4.2.3 Historical Museum of the Bersaglieri: ROME - Porta Pia - Via XX Settembre. Tel. 06-486723.
12.4.3.1 Historical naval museum: VENICE - Castello, 2148. Tel. 041-2709301.
In particular, the General Commissariat provides for:
The aforementioned law was followed by the rules and provisions for war cemeteries (law 20 February 1981, n. 31) and that (law 2 March 1985, n. 60) which expanded the competences of the General Commissioner.
12.4.3 Navy Museums: ____________
12.4.2.8 Historical Museum of Motor Vehicles: ROME - Cecchignola, Viale dell' Army, 170. Tel. 06-5011885.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it This provision replaced the previous ones issued, respectively, in 1919, 1931 and 1935.
General for the Honors of the Fallen in War, reporting directly to the Minister of Defense, the task of providing for the "census, research, temporary arrangement and subsequent definitive arrangement of the bodies of military, militarized and civilians deceased as a result of the war from 10 June 1940 to 15 April 1946".
3725446.
• arrangement, maintenance and custody of the burial grounds of Italian war dead abroad; • research, arrangement and conservation of memorabilia belonging to the fallen in war; • conservation and protection of the monumental areas of the First World War; • dissemination of news regarding the fallen and military shrines; • maintaining relationships with joint bodies in other countries.
12.4.2.7 Historical Museum of the Corps of Engineers: ROME - Lungotevere della Vittoria, 31. Tel. 06-12.5 General Commissariat for Honoring the Fallen in War 12.5.1 Historical notes and institutional duties A legal provision issued in 1951 (n. 204, dated 9 January 1951) entrusted a Commissioner (*) This is a public-administrative act through which the General Commissariat acquires the temporary use of a property (or part of it) owned by local administrations or private ecclesiastical bodies, for the conservation of the burials of the Fallen in war present there and the consequent right to intervene in maintenance with the funds of the institute chapter.
General Commissariat has acquired the "right of use" (*); • protection of the burials of war dead buried in municipal cemeteries;
5629223.
231


The political openness of the former USSR allowed for a more frank dialogue with those govemment authorities, which materialized with the first contacts suitable for agreeing on the methods for identifying war burials and the subsequent repatriation of the bodies of the fallen.
The small amount of funding in past years has only allowed the execution of purely "survival" works, as it was not possible to carry out larger works. In the years from '90 to '95 it was possible to obtain extraordinary assignments, thanks to which more substantial rehabilitation and restoration interventions were carried out. The current asset value of the major monumental complexes exceeds 600 billion lire and, according to normal property maintenance criteria, the related annual expenditure should be around 15 billion lire, while the funds annually allocated to specific needs do not on average exceed 6 billion.
12.5.5.3 Publications and audio visuals of HONORABLE DAMAGERS, based on law no. 60 of 2 March 1985, has proceeded with the constant updating and reprinting of publications for free transfer on the major military shrines in Italy and abroad. As far as audiovisuals are concemed, the transposition onto sound videocassettes has been completed. In the short term, the creation of two new video films is also planned, specifically intended for the Shrines of Bari and Asiago.
12.5.2 Search, transfer and definitive arrangement of the Italian Fallen The activity of the General Commissariat, in the years from 1989 to 1997, was mainly aimed at searching for the burials of the Fallen on the Russian front in the Second World War.
12.5.3 Infrastructure Among the services entrusted by current regulations to the General Commissariat for the Honors of the Fallen in War include (law 9 January 1951, n. 204):
- the arrangement, custody and maintenance of war cemeteries in Italy and abroad (over 230 in Italy and 74 abroad) and related museums; • the conservation of monumental war zones; the maintenance of existing burials on the national territory, in which the mortal remains of the Austro-Hungarian (World War 1) and Polish (World War 2) fallen are collected. • The General Commissioner makes use of a suitable structure, based in Rome, with an intemal structure of 5 Offices/ Directorates and a territorial structure relating to the Shrines located in Italy and abroad.
12.5.5.2 Museums Among the institutional tasks of ONORCADUTI, the collection and historical valorization of war relics is of particular importance. A certain number of museums have therefore been set up as an integral part of the military shrines. Over the last decade, a review of the various locations has been carried out and others have been formed from scratch.
At a national level, in the years 1989-1997, the census of the burials of fallen soldiers buried in cemeteries in the homeland continued.
12.5.4 State property issues The legislation on the Fallen has essentially remained the same as that of the 1930s. The precepts contained therein have gradually lost their effectiveness as the question of "honoring the fallen" has gradually transformed into the need to maintain burial structures. In this context, a revision of the regulatory framework appears necessary, to allow the full implementation of the law of 9 January 1951 (art. 7, paragraph 1) conceming the taking over, by the Municipalities, of the war burial grounds existing in the territory of their respective competence. ____________ 12.5.5 MISCELLANEOUS 12.5.5.1 Relations with the Associations Following the intensification of the operational activity carried out by ONORCADUTI in the years 1989-1997, relations with the various Armed Forces and Combatant Associations further increased, in particular with the National Union Intemees and Veterans of Russia (UNIRR) which provided valid support to the solution of the problems regarding the fate of Italian soldiers fallen and missing in Russia.
For the execution of maintenance and restoration works, the General Commissariat has a specific body: the Works and State Property Management.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it 232


233 Obviously, the composition of the land instrument in the professional model will have to be calibrated on the missions that the Army will have to carry out, deriving in tum from the tasks attributed by law to the Armed Forces, and on the role that Italy has decided to play in the intemational field.
Equally evident is the growing criticality of the situation with the emergence of large-scale terrorist actions.
The effort that Italy is making to keep faith with intemational commitments addressed in multiple activities and directions is evident.
Possible evolutionary lines for the Army The land instrument with a mixed volunteer-lever composition, foreseen by Legislative Decree 27 June 2000 n. 214 for a total of 137,000 men, has therefore undergone a significant modification for the approval of Law 14 November 2000, n. 331 on the professional military service which reduced its size to 112,000 units to be achieved by 2004.
This restructuring requires an impressive commitment not only from a quantitative point of view (a further overall reduction equal to approximately 20% compared to the structure outlined in the model mixed), but also for the cultural leap that it implies and for the speed with which it is necessary to proceed. Add to this the burden that the Armed Force has been supporting, uninterruptedly for about twenty years (the first mission can be considered that of Beirut in 1982), outside the national territory.
The current situation therefore aims to provide the basic elements for identifying trend lines aimed at seeking the most appropriate solutions to the needs of national security within the framework of a military policy increasingly consistent with the principles of management economics.
Below are indicated what are considered possible evolutionary lines to be studied in depth as topics of study by specific working groups.
The transition phase is still underway, as there have been and remain many repercussions on personnel, resources, the efficiency of the system and on the relationship between financial resources and tasks to be carried out, especially in consideration of the changed geo-strategic scenario of this part of the year 2001. ____________ Possible evolutionary lines of restructuring Part II illustrated the legislative provisions adopted from December 1995 to May 2001, following which the defense structure changed and is still changing its architecture.
In this context it will also be appropriate to examine the merging of school bodies and special forces.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The in-depth analysis should also allow the search for a better relationship between the operational component and the central and support bodies, to optimize the use of available resources and to avoid or reduce areas of overlap of competences with the Central Bodies, especially with regards to recruitment, infrastructure and some logistics sectors.
There are many shortcomings in operational capacity, so it will be necessary to concentrate and rationalize the central bodies and the command and support structures of the forces, both intemally and intemationally, in order to recover personnel, resources and infrastructures for the benefit of the strengthening of operational forces. These constitute, in fact, the primary instrument of military policy which, since 11 September, has found itself and will find itself facing a whole set of situations and tasks characterized by contemporaneity and also by different spatial locations. are achievable with the “simple reductive restructuring in progress”.
This means equipping ourselves with extremely flexible structures, capable of dealing with diversified situations which can also present themselves as emergencies and therefore require the maximum timeliness of reaction. Hence the opportunity to further deepen the current command organisation, both to be able to identify and project commands at different levels with its own organic units, and to automatically deal with the tumover needs of the commands and units employed abroad.
The goals set with NATO's Defense Capabilities Initiative and similar ones defined within the EU do not
PART II - THE DEFENSE
PART I - THE SITUATION: FROM THREAT TO RISK In this context, the decisive impulse in the Euro-Atlantic context for initiatives regarding military capabilities for crisis management translates, for NATO, into the adaptation of the Reaction Forces and, for the European Union, in the construction of the "pillar security and defense" through the establishment of a European rapid reaction force.


Possible evolutionary lines for the Carabinieri The processes of simplification and computerization of procedures and those of reorganization of all logistical and administrative activities have allowed and will continue to allow for significant recoveries of strength, all aimed at strengthening operational activities.
In this direction it is possible to achieve management savings, in line with the economic principle of centralization in case of shortage of resources and also in compliance with the military criterion of closely combining the training and employment phases. In this case, one of the topics to be explored further must be that of the convenience of merging the Air Squadron Command with the Air Force Command, as well as the personnel sector and some logistics bodies in correlation with the similar structures of the other Armed Forces or the General Directorates.
Also for the Navy, as for the Army, it is necessary to deepen the overall structure to achieve the best possible relationship between the command and support component and the operational naval component.
To ensure the full operation of the MM it is also necessary to complete the legislative and regulatory framework associated with the restructuring of the Armed Forces; in this context the urgent approval of some regulations associated with the new organizational framework must also be included, such as the new Arsenal Regulations, the new Administration Regulations, the Regulation on infrastructural works. Finally, there is the need to redevelop the technical-logistic support structures that influence the effectiveness and efficiency of the naval and air forces, with particular reference to the Arsenals (Taranto/Brindisi, La Spezia, Augusta) and the main naval bases.
The ordering by macro functions, while it can satisfy some command needs and above all operational ones, sometimes leaves coordination problems unsolved due to the dispersion of tasks and the related responsible bodies which, however, can find the right place in multipurpose structures.
The felt need to continue the restructuring process reveals the criticality of the moment that this Armed Force is going through like the others.
To achieve this, it is necessary to have an impact, in particular, on the territorial structures of Sardinia, in which the competences of the Autonomous Maritime Military Command are transferred from the headquarters of La Maddalena to that of Cagliari; of Sicily, in which similar skills were transferred from the Messina office to that of Augusta.
Possible evolutionary lines for the Navy The provisions of the MM contained in the aforementioned Legislative Decree no. 214/2000 are characterized by the need to achieve increasingly effective operation of the military instrument in a short time and by the need to adopt solutions with a broader cost-effectiveness ratio, concentrating military personnel in certain operationally strategic geographical areas. In this sense, the organizational and operational plan of the FA provides for the presence of a territorial command, a suitable air-naval base, a production arsenal, depots and warehouses for ammunition, fuel and food supplies only in the areas - air-naval hubs - of Taranto, La Spezia and Augusta, which meet the strategic and security criteria underlying the reform.
Lastly, it is appropriate to delve deeper into the reconfiguration of the Air Regions to which tasks of a transversal nature can be attributed, i.e. in matters of common interest that go beyond the specific sphere of attributions of the individual High Commanders. ____________ Projects to concentrate operational resources, peripheral logistical structures, as well as institutes and schools of the Armed Forces must fall within this context. How studies should be continued on the various out-sourcing hypotheses in order to allocate the AM staff, currently dedicated to those sectors, to other activities more closely in line with the FA's mission.
In particular, in relation to the need to reduce the organic size of the Air Force personnel, deriving from the transition to the professional model, projects aimed at optimizing the available resources must be continued, safeguarding the fulfillment of institutional missions.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it However, some interventions remain to be finalized which, although relevant, derive from the functional division criterion that inspired the entire process.
Possible evolutionary lines for the Air Force The reorganization project of the Armed Forces has now entered its final phase. From a general point of view, in fact, the structure outlined with Legislative Decree no. can be considered definitive. 464/1997.
Furthermore, within the command and support component, the duplications and overlaps of functions must be examined, both relating to personnel and inherent to logistics, also with reference to the responsibilities attributed to some General Directorates.
234


235 Furthermore, in the inevitable review of all those activities deriving from agreements that go beyond those of a fundamental nature (i.e. NATO and the EU), the willingness to take into consideration any cooperation needs, especially bilateral ones, dictated by situations contingent or training needs.
Finally, it is necessary to guarantee the correspondence between the aforementioned commitments and the support of financial resources and adequate logistical structures to keep the vehicles efficient, provide the necessary equipment and training, renew and modemize the materials and weapon systems wom out by so much use.
The first consideration, certainly positive, is that the "reduction" work prescribed by the finance law of December
1995 has been completed in its general lines.
The analysis of the restructuring process of the Armed Forces cannot be concluded without some considerations aimed at identifying the elements influencing the further evolution of the military structure. it is appropriate to concentrate efforts only on choices deriving from national security and commitments with the UN, NATO and the EU, avoiding dispersion of human and financial resources in other intemational structures.
At the same time, the Defense General Staff, which has rightly assumed the pre-eminent function in the inter-force conception of the military instrument, should take over all those functions which are divided, but also repeated and overlapping, between the Armed Forces General Staff and some General Directorates : in concrete terms we refer to healthcare, police station, supplies, infrastructure, transport and recruitment. Furthermore, considering that the needs for territorial control have increased, it would be Summary of possible evolutionary lines on defense The subsequent measures in the context of the exercise of the delegation and the next consultation will complete the evolutionary development of the Force, with largely positive repercussions on the strengthening of the overall action of the Institution.
A similar in-depth study will be appropriate regarding the size of the Brigades (Light Brigades or Heavy Brigades?) and the establishment of a joint Special Forces department. ____________ To achieve this, given the impossibility in economic terms and in terms of quantity of personnel to achieve this objective, all that remains is to review the structure of the 112,000 men and women made available by current legislation, reducing or eliminating intermediate structures whose functions can be reabsorbed by the General Staff of the Armed Forces and by studying a different command architecture, to be explored through "bunch marking" operations between the General Staff and towards the General Command of the Carabinieri.
The overall total for the Army, considering the tumover needs at the limit of acceptability, would be 9-10 Brigades and, since the Army constitutes the predominant part in the development of these operations, it must be recognized that it would be desirable increase the availability of the ground forces up to the current 12-13 Brigades.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it In summary, it is within the structures of the Armed Forces that the solution can and must be found to save resources, personnel and infrastructure. The renovation has not come to an end and the effort must aim to seek better architecture.
The fourth consideration, of a completely different nature, as it is not linked to reflections of an orderly nature but to the evolution of the intemational security framework, requires an in-depth analysis of the "state of the art" and that is, a verification of what has been done and whether what has been done responds to the new security needs of the Nation.
The third consideration, always positive, is that compulsory conscription has been suspended, so the Armed Forces, within four or five years, will be made up entirely of professional soldiers for a total of 190,000 men and women. This is thanks to the law of November 2000 and the subsequent Legislative Decree of May 2001.
In light of these considerations, it seems necessary to reopen the discussion of the restructuring of Defense to achieve, through an intemal rearticulation of structures and resources, a higher level of operational efficiency commensurate with the needs of national and intemational security.
The second consideration, also positive, is that the line of command found its correct definition with the law on the reform of top management of February 1997 and with its implementation regulation of October 1999.
PART V - MILITARY PERSONNEL


236 However, the mergers will require further in-depth analysis regarding the methods of transition from role to role, the harmonization of age limits, the starting date of the reorganization, the identification of the necessary transitional period. recently elevated "ope legis" to Lieutenant General by the law on mobility, leading to a certain number of discrepancies in the normalized advancement system and the various organic pyramids and on which it will necessarily be necessary to intervene; • to implement, at least in part, the requests made in the past regarding the alignment of the career profiles of the Corps with those of the Arms. This is substantially acceptable (despite the differentiations deriving from the different age limits), given that recruitment into normal roles today takes place mainly through the Academies and therefore differentiations in career profiles are not convenient, at least in the pre-managerial grades, compared to of similar employment profiles. called back by the auxiliary. A further revision of the law on status and advancement and consequently of the roles is therefore necessary in order to guarantee the presence of a "right" number of "graduates" corresponding to the "right" functions to be performed.
As for the reform of roles, their merging would also allow: • a more profitable use of the Officers who are now "Heads of the Corps", whose top rank has been The Italian Armed Forces today have 614 generals and admirals among active personnel and personnel A topic, however, to be explored further in order to guarantee the best possible framework for the operational units.
- Officers Possible evolutionary lines (*) Data referring to 2001 (absence of enlisted personnel) and does not include the values reported by the Gendarmerie. ____________ • • Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
- Troop volunteers keeping only the Medical Corps separate, in consideration both of the specific and exclusive professionalism experienced and of the future structure of the Military Healthcare itself.
The reinstatement of the compulsory period of command deserves similar in-depth analysis, as it is a test of officers' abilities for the purposes of advancement, and the definition of the age limit as an insurmountable "ceiling" even for top positions.
The reorganization of the roles of the officers of the FF.AA. implemented by Legislative Decree 490/97 was based on the rigid separation of duties deriving from the FA's organizational laws, which in tum date back to the pre-war period, and on a military instrument based essentially on conscription. Following the approval of the professional model, the activities to be implemented for the performance of functions related to "combat" and those with a predominantly "technical - logistics" connotation are now more properly identifiable. In particular, it would be a question of verifying the convenience of unifying, maintaining the current distinction between normal roles and special roles, for the same reasons highlighted at the time in the preparation phase of Legislative Decree no. 490/97: the "operational" roles with the "intermediate" ones, for the "combat" function; l among them, the roles of the engineers with the logistical ones for the "technological" function;
This is given that the merging of the roles of the officers in the two sectors would allow the overall number of normal and special roles of the officers of the three FAs to be reduced from the current 30 to no more than 15/18, with benefits for both employment and training of the staff. The desired remodulation would also be in line with the defense models of other European nations, such as Great Britain and France, and the consequent Cadre/Total percentage ratios, as can be deduced from the data summarized in the following
table.
At the moment it has not been possible to fully satisfy the need recruitment of volunteers with the "preferential" competition, i.e. pursuant to Presidential Decree no. 332/97. This required the adoption of a more expeditious procedure which provides for the selection only in the FA field and a more "expeditious" and effective competition procedure for the functionality of the FF.AA.
Furthermore, this procedure offers employment guarantees of "outlet" even more uncertain (


237 Ultimately, the transformation process underway in the Armed Forces hinges on a "challenge" which involves not only the military institutions, but the entire Italian political and social context.
• an "ad hoc" regulation to provide support to the families of soldiers engaged in multiple "outside area" missions: an increasingly felt need in view of an intensification of such activities.
• the absolute reservation of available positions in the civil and military police forces and in the administrations currently interested in recruitment pursuant to Presidential Decree no. 332/97;
In particular, with regards to recruitment and entry into the world of work, it is preliminarily highlighted that the two aspects are directly connected: only by offering attractive prospects for the entry into the world of work of young volunteers who have completed their placement, will it be It is possible to have an adequate pool of applications such as to allow for a better qualitative selection and at the same time also satisfy the quantitative requirement. In this context it could be convenient to pursue: • improvement of living conditions, providing for: the improvement of barracks and service accommodation, as well as facilitated conditions for access to home ownership at the end of the service and also the introduction of a housing allowance to deal with serious shortages in the sector that impose unacceptable living conditions on military personnel;
Furthermore, it will also be necessary to intervene in the sector of economic treatment, in order to adequately reward those who decide to dedicate three years or, in the near future, at least five years of their lives to the FF.AA. as a prerequisite for entering the world of work.
Furthermore, the need to adopt measures also in the field of the other Police Forces - but assigned annually by Budget Law.
In fact, the 12,000 units currently expected are not included in the organic volumes - as happens for ____________ It should be highlighted in this regard that the two aspects are closely related, as emerges from the examination of the data relating to the trend of recruitment applications over the years.
• the attribution of the economic treatment corresponding to the V level and no longer a daily salary as a percentage (today the volunteer of the FF.AA. receives a daily salary corresponding to 60-70% of the personnel classified in the V level; in the public administration in general the staff, even on a fixed-term contract, receives the same salary as the corresponding staff hired on a permanent contract); • the possibility of remunerating the services of volunteer staff on duty beyond working hours with a specific allowance. At the moment, this service requires only an adequate period of psycho-physical rest.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it The provisions of art. 7 of Legislative Decree no. 215/2001, on the reconfiguration of the military instrument into a professional one, will also have a significant impact on the Army which, due to the suspension of military service, will no longer be able count on the contribution of auxiliaries, introduced in 1963 and intended to regularly feed the departments with tasks similar to those of the actual staff.
- Auxiliary Carabinieri With regards to the economic aspect, the adjustment of the volunteers' salaries to those of the equal law enforcement personnel cannot be postponed , providing for:
• measures aimed at granting tax relief for private companies that hire this type of staff. This should also be pursued through appropriate professional training courses, placed at the end of the term, preparatory to future entry into the world of work.
A possible failure of the volunteer recruitment policy would fundamentally compromise the professionalization process itself.
• the introduction of legislation that also reserves the absolute reserve of places available for Armed Forces volunteers in municipal and provincial police forces. who have concluded the relevant arrest. This provision is contemplated in the recent legislative decree (8 May 2001, n.215) descending from the "Professional" law (L. n. 331/2000) and will have to be better defined (in amount/percentage and procedure to be adopted) through a forthcoming legislation to be issued within one year of the aforementioned legislative decree no.
215/01; pre-established reservations of places). It will necessarily be necessary to intervene on these prospects. How it will be appropriate to delve deeper into the problem of the numerous psychotechnical-aptitude selection centers.


238 It is therefore essential to proceed with the replacement of the 12,000 auxiliary Carabinieri with 9,000 personnel by 2005. The replacement could be carried out in the four-year period 2002-2005 by drawing the necessary 1,800 units per year, exceptionally, entirely from the volunteers of the FF.AA. who aspire to join the Army, thus encouraging the enlistment of volunteers in the Armed Forces.
Summary of the possible Evolutionary Lines on the staff The staff problems are numerous and have been addressed mainly in terms of the functionality of the instrument, sometimes neglecting the human aspect which however affects the functionality as it can cause disorientation and demotivation.
In particular, we refer to: 1. the reduction of transition times for the end of military service; 2. looking for the most valid ways to guarantee volunteers entry into the world of work; 3. the economic measures necessary to encourage the exodus of redundant staff and to improve emoluments for those who remain; 4. the restoration of command periods as an indispensable test bed for advancements; 5. the composition of the advancement commissions to guarantee the impartiality of the judgment; 6. to respect, without exceptions, the age limits for each grade; 7. the impetus to be given to the new law on military representation; 8. the redundancy of the bodies responsible for dealing with personnel in general and the volunteer recruitment system.
The current situation may also lead to discontinuities in the coordination activities between surveillance in the high seas and the territorial sea, often resolved with ad hoc coordination formulas but not always effective.
The cessation of this form of supply, which ensures more than 10% of the entire force of the Force, would produce - in the absence of adequate corrective measures - a significant decline in the operational capacity of the Institution, in the face of a constantly expanding needs framework.
There are therefore some aspects that need to be taken into account and which constitute one of the fundamental objectives of the next govemment activity.
• the surveillance and protection of maritime air spaces located outside territorial waters is an activity carried out by the Navy by virtue of both legal reserves and intemational treaties; • a multiplicity of institutional actors operate on the territorial sea with defined tasks for the performance of PS/PG activities (as a continuation of the repression of criminal activities carried out or in any case connected with the national territory) in addition to the Port Authority Corps, which carries out more specifically maritime tasks (control of merchant traffic, application of the navigation code) as well as rescue and fight against pollution at sea.
Possible evolutionary lines The system of "permanent training" of personnel, although adopted by the Army relatively recently, has already made it possible to achieve very significant results, with positive repercussions on the operational activities carried out in Italy and abroad. ____________ For the enlisted personnel of the Port Authority, the same problem exists as indicated in the previous paragraph for the auxiliary Carabinieri. It involves having to deal with the progressive replacement of the approximately 3,000 soldiers who currently perform military service in the Corps. Personnel who are not included in the 190,000 unit model as they are financed by another Department.
Here it is worth remembering that the Port Authority Corps on the one hand depends on and is financed by the Ministry of Infrastructure and Transport, on the other it is a Navy Corps. In this regard, it should be noted that, in principle and without prejudice to what is provided for wartime:
- Port Authority Corps Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it In this regard, without prejudice to the particular activities carried out by other institutional actors operating at sea, and also given the geopolitical position of Italy (whose maritime economic spaces border Croatia, Yugoslavia, Algeria, Tunisia, Libya etc.), it appears pragmatically viable is a reform which, at least in the first instance, fully brings the Port Authorities (part of the Navy) back into the Defense sphere. This is also given that the recent reform of the Ministries assigns to the Ministry of Infrastructure (on which the CP Corps depends and is financed) residual tasks with respect to the activities to be carried out at sea.
PART VI - TRAINING


239 This conceptual renewal - which, during 2001, among other things led the Armed Forces to start, among NonCommissioned Officers and Volunteers, approximately 22,000 units on courses in the national territory and approximately 2,200 units on courses/intemships/training on the jobs abroad - is being further refined, through: - the definitive adoption, in all educational institutions, of teaching by objectives, understood as the dynamic and harmonious development of the training process based on the sequential phases of needs analysis, planning, execution and verification of results;
Nor can the organizational effort made by the General Staff to guarantee the efficiency, to the limit of "survival", of the Armed Forces engaged today in dealing with employment situations which are solely for maintaining peace, be overlooked. Therefore, if instead of these, a task of a higher level of conflict were to be faced, emergency financial measures should be taken.
In fact, it is one thing to support the operation of 10,000 men in peace-keeping tasks (not even peace-enforcing) by having men and resources corresponding to 30,000 – 40,000 volunteers from the three Armed Forces Today more than yesterday, in fact, the military professional is required to have knowledge and skills that extend in every direction, necessary to allow him to face the weight of his responsibilities in the best possible way and with serene awareness in the various and complex situations in which he may find himself act, in different operating environments, in Italy and abroad.
In this context, training activities aimed at the so-called "intemationalisation" of executives have taken on particular importance to date, as they are specifically aimed at preparing Officers, Non-Commissioned Officers and Volunteers for deployment abroad or in any case in joint/multinational contexts.
Possible evolutionary lines The analytical examination of the current situation and the indication of the modemization programs necessary to guarantee the efficiency of the Armed Forces, together with the considerations formulated from time to time, clearly highlight the state of absolute necessity in which they find themselves especially the Army, Navy and Air Force. The situation can, however, be defined as satisfactory for the Carabinieri.
Furthermore, it is necessary, particularly for Officers and Non-Commissioned Officers of all the Armed Forces, to continue to focus in the future and with growing determination on deepening their historical, political, economic, legal and scientific preparation, in addition to the specific military character. on which the mass of availability has converged. It would be quite another to face greater commitments with weapon systems that are sometimes outdated, limited availability of training and war ammunition, vehicles whose inefficiencies fluctuate between 30% and 50%, limited availability of spare parts stocks and bureaucratic obstacles which limit any effort of good will aimed at making interventions and the possibility of deploying forces timely. It must also be recognized that the funding provided for missions meets the needs of personnel, but not those of materials. ____________ A similar commitment is required for the refinement of the training techniques of the volunteers who must not lose the level of efficiency achieved with the 3rd level and, above all, after the peace-keeping operations, they must revive the combat training, often weakened by checkpoint culture. Therefore, the periods between commitments in the theater of operations can and must be better calibrated both by virtue of the introduction of an increasingly higher number of volunteers into the departments and in consideration of the time necessary for reconditioning the personnel.
- the search for self-training, an area always "in progress", as a tool to improve the individual's knowledge in the technical-professional sector of his/her competence.
- the provision of greater flexibility to the teaching activity, to achieve training objectives that are always concrete and truly sustainable, through eminently practical teaching and training; - the continuous verification of the Course programmes, which must be increasingly characterized by brevity and intensity, with the aim of keeping the attendees away from the employment departments for as little time as possible;
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it For the troops, the transition phase from military service to professionalism requires careful management of the conscripts, who in their 10 months of service must carry out intensive training both to achieve the operational efficiency necessary to carry out "presence and surveillance" tasks, and so as not to feel like "second-class soldiers".
To conclude, it can be admitted that the modemization of the logistics chain has been achieved in its fundamental structures. Final adjustments are expected soon. But if the modemization plans requested by the General Staff are not implemented, we risk having created a
PART IX - THE MATERIALS


240 of a suitable budget for the year can at most reduce that for modemisation, without prejudice, of course, to the needs for technical and technological innovation.
Sporting activity in the Armed Forces Possible lines of evolution From an examination of the results, the preponderance of long-standing military personnel among the top ranked is evident. On the other hand, continuous commitment is natural, necessary and indispensable to achieve results "in the medal zone". Therefore Carabinieri, Financiers, State Police and Forestry Police agents are always at the top of the rankings of athletes in uniform.
Therefore the summary of what has been said can be expressed by the recognition of an absolute priority to be attributed to the materials sector, an unavoidable condition for conferring the necessary operational capacity to the Armed Forces and a preferential vehicle for achieving the attribution of superior efficiency categories also within NATO. .
Furthermore, two incremental factors in the fall in efficiency of the military structure must be kept in mind: - The first is that deriving from the intense wear and tear imposed on the vehicles by use in operations of a higher intensity than that of normal training activity in the homeland; - The second is the one connected to the summation which is determined when the inefficiencies or the rate of attrition are not immediately remedied or compensated for. The limit, in fact, translates into "not convenient repairs" and therefore into the need to purchase a new vehicle.
The transition to the professional Armed Forces will over time offer a greater possibility of results for the Army, Navy and Air Force, but at the same time, precisely due to the significant reduction of the same, it will be necessary to plan the preparation for competitive activity with a joint vision. Consequently, the Sports Centers will have to acquire the "multiweapon" characteristic by bringing together athletes who practice the same sporting discipline regardless of the Armed Force they belong to.
Military Museums Possible evolutionary lines With the reduction of military personnel due to the professionalization of the Armed Forces, the entire sector is currently being studied by the Defense General Staff to seek a solution that allows the publicization and full maintenance of the activity museum, both from the point of view of conservation of the assets contained therein, and to guarantee attendance by the public.
The possibility of establishing a single military museum in Rome is also being studied, following the example of what has been achieved in Paris, London and Brussels. The initiative must be included in the historical-reminiscent path advocated This is why "maintenance" and "operation" have merged into a single budget item. As well as the guarantee Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it is also considered appropriate to draw attention to the phenomenon of "athletes" in uniform, who only carry out sporting activities without setting foot in the barracks or without any operational training activity.
A normalization effort in this sector could successfully combine sporting ethics with military ethics. ____________ Military joumalism Possible evolutionary lines At present, the problem of the lack of professionalism in the Italian Armed Forces could be addressed: - with immediate effect: by starting the qualification of personnel through attendance of the specific courses provided for by the aforementioned Implementation Regulation. Until now, personnel training is carried out according to the availability and will of each individual Armed Force with the result that courses of recognized value (organised within NATO or by organizations such as RAI) are not always carried out by personnel who would have need; - in the medium term: by inserting a "master's" into the programs of the Application Schools for the qualification of effective officers recognized as most suitable for public relations; - in a medium-term perspective: carefully evaluating the possibility of establishing a specific role for public information officials.
ARMED FORCES, ARMS ASSOCIATIONS, MILITARY MUSEUMS, "engine" that tums only on itself, without being able to "move the load which often isn't there".
GENERAL COMMISSIONER HONORS TO THE FALLEN IN WAR
PART XII - MILITARY PUBLICITY, SPORTS ACTIVITY IN


Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it ____________ by the Head of State from 2001 to 2011, the year in which the 150th anniversary of the constitution of the Italian State will be celebrated.
241


242 L. 20 October 1999, n. 380 Legislative Decree 8 May 2001, n.
215 Provisions to regulate the progressive transformation of the military instrument into a professional one, pursuant to article 3, paragraph 1, of Law 14 November 2000, n. 331.
Presidential Decree 25 October 1999, n. 556 Regulation implementing article 10 of Law 18 February 1997, n. 25 (2), conceming the powers of the Military Summits.
Reorganization of the recruitment, legal status and advancement of the Officers of the Carabinieri, in accordance with article 1 of law 31
March 2000, n. 78.
Legislative Decree 5 October 2000, n. 298 L. 18 February 1997 n. 25 Duties of the Minister of Defence, Restructuring of the Top Management of the Armed Forces and the Defense Administration.
L. 14 November 2000, n. 331 Rules for the establishment of professional military service.
Corrective provisions of Legislative Decree 30 December 1997, n. 490, containing the reorganization of the recruitment, legal status and advancement of Officers, pursuant to article 9, paragraph 2, of Law no. 31 March 2000. 78.
1. RESTRUCTURING L. 28
December 1995, n. 459 “Measures to rationalize public finance”.
Legislative Decree 5 October 2000, n. 297 Rules regarding the reorganization of the Carabinieri in accordance with article 1 of law 31 March 2000, n. 78.
Legislative Decree 28 June 2000, n. 216 Delegation to the Govemment regarding the reorganization of the Carabinieri, the State Forestry Corps, the Financial Police and the State Police. Rules regarding the coordination of the Police Forces.
3. CARABINIERI Law
31 March 2000, n. 78 ____________
2. RECRUITMENT, STATUS AND ADVANCEMENT Legislative Decree
30 December 1997, n. 490 Reorganization of the recruitment, legal status and advancement of Officers, pursuant to article 1, paragraph 97, of Law no. 23 December 1996. 662 .
Legislative Decree 28 November 1997, n.
459 Reorganization of the technical-industrial area of the Ministry of Defence, pursuant to article 1, paragraph 1, letter c), of Law no. 28
December 1995. 549.
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
Decree 4 April 2000, n. 114 Regulation containing rules regarding the assessment of suitability for military service.
Legislative Decree 31 January 2000, n. 24 Provisions regarding voluntary recruitment, legal status and advancement of female military personnel in the Armed Forces and in the Financial Police Corps, pursuant to article 1, paragraph 2, of Law no. 20 October 1999. 380.
Legislative Decree 16 July 1997, n.
264 Reorganization of the central area of the Ministry of Defence, pursuant to article 1, paragraph 1, letter b), of Law 28 December 1995, n.
549.
Legislative Decree 27 June 2000, n.
214 Corrective and supplementary provisions of Legislative Decree 28 November 1997, n. 464, containing the structural reform of the Armed Forces, pursuant to article 9, paragraph 2, of Law no. 31 March 2000. 78.
Delegation to the Govemment for the establishment of women's voluntary military service.
4.
ACCOMMODATION L. 18 August 1978, n. 497 Legislative Decree 28 November 1997 n.
464 Structural reform of the Armed Forces, pursuant to article 1, paragraph 1, letters a), d9, and h9, of Law no. 28 December 1995.
549.
LEGISLATIVE REFERENCES


Memorandum of Understanding dated 22 April 1975 relating to the creation of a Liaison Committee of the military social bodies responsible for families and youth".
RD 15 April 1928, n. 1024 “Replacement of a new regulation to the one approved with RD 22 June 1926, n. 1067, for the execution of Law 11 March 1926, n.
416, on the procedures to be followed in medical-legal assessments of wounds, injuries and illnesses of personnel employed by military administrations and other state administrations".
L. 388/2000 “Provisions for the formation of the annual and multi-annual State budget”, art. 43 of the same law.
6. WELL-BEING L.
11 March 1926, n. 416 “New provisions on the procedures to be followed in medical-legal assessments of wounds, injuries and illnesses of personnel employed by military administrations and other state administrations”.
L. 266/99 “Delegation to the Govemment for the reorganization of diplomatic and prefectural careers, as well as provisions for the remaining staff of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, for the military personnel of the Ministry of Defense, for the staff of the Penitentiary Administration and for the staff of the Superior Council of the Judiciary", art. 16 of the same law.
Pub. SMD-G-023 ed. 99 "Directive for social protection interventions within the Armed Forces containing methods for the management and reporting of the related activities".
Legislative Decree 28 November 1997, n. 464 Structural reform of the Armed Forces, pursuant to art. 1, paragraph 1, letters a, d, h, of law 28 December 1995, n. 549. “Spending authorization for the construction of service accommodation for military personnel and regulation of the related concessions” and, in particular, art. 20 which provides for the issuing of the regulation for service accommodation of the Armed Forces; L. 24 December 1993, n.
537 “Corrective measures for public finances” and, in particular, article 9 of the same law; L. 23 December 1994, n. 724 “Measures to rationalize public finance” and, in particular, article 43 of the same law; Ministerial Decree 16 January 1997, n. 253 Regulation containing rules for service accommodation of the Armed Forces.
Decree 31 December 1998, n. 522 "Regulation establishing methods for the management and reporting of social protection activities for military and civilian personnel of the Armed Forces". ____________
Decree 31 December 1998, n. 521 “Regulations containing rules regarding the Armed Forces, Administration experts and related rules of use”.
L. 24 October 1996, n. 556 “Conversion into law, with modification, of the Legislative Decree of 8 August 1996, n. 437, containing urgent provisions regarding direct and indirect information, functionality of the financial administration, off-balance sheet management, providential funds and tax disputes".
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it Presidential Decree 16 March 1999, n. 255 “Implementation of the concertation provision for the Armed Forces relating to the four-year regulatory period 1998-2001 and the two-year economic period 1998-1999”, art. 18 of the same Presidential Decree and subsequently integrated by Presidential Decree 24 July 1977, n. 616 “Activation of the delegation referred to in art. 1 of Law 22 July 1975, n. 382”.
5. SOCIAL PROTECTION BODIES L. 23 December 1993, n. 559 “Discipline of the suppression of off-balance sheet management within the State Administrations”.
Presidential Decree 20 April 1994, n. 349 Regulation containing the reorganization of procedures for the recognition of illness or injury resulting from service and the granting of fair compensation”.
L. 2 April 2001, n. 136 "Provisions regarding the development, valorisation and use of the State's real estate assets, as well as other provisions regarding public properties".
243


7. ASSOCIATIONS Ministerial Decree 5
August 1982 "Regulations for connecting the military representation with the representatives of the military categories on leave and pensioners".
Publications Center for Peace Studies www.studiperlapace.it
Decree 7 May 1998, n. 195 “Regulation containing rules for the identification of fighting and weapons associations and amateur sports associations to which the provision of the art. applies. 1, paragraph 1, of Law 11 July 1986, n. 390, article 5, paragraph 8 and 8bis, of Law 29 November 1995, n. 507”.
8. MILITARY PROPERTIES Prime Ministerial Decree of 11 August 1997 Identification of real estate assets available to the Ministry of Defense to be included in the divestment program envisaged by art. 3, paragraph 112, of Law 23 December 1996, n. 662. ____________
Law 2 April 2001, n. 136 Provisions regarding the development, valorisation and use of the State's real estate assets, as well as other provisions regarding public properties.
Law 11 July 1986, n. 390 "Discipline of concessions and rentals of state-owned and state-owned real estate in favor of cultural bodies or institutes of territorial public bodies, local health units, religious orders and ecclesiastical bodies".
9. MILITARY SERVITIES
Law 24 December 1976 n. 898 New regulation of military servitudes.
L. 30 November 2000, n. 356 conceming "provisions conceming the personnel of the Armed Forces and the Police Forces" referred to in art. 4, paragraph 2 of the same law.
Law 29 November 1995, n. 507 “Conversion into law, with amendments, of the legislative decree of 2 October 1995, n. 415, containing the extension of terms in favor of subjects residing in the areas affected by the flood events of November 1994 and additional provisions of the legislative decree of 23 February 1995, n. 41, converted, with amendments, by law 22 March 1995, n.
85.
Circular DGPM/313 of 27 March 2001 "Welfare interventions for military defense personnel".
244

