19971015 047


CHAIRMANOF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20318-9999



'l.n;iU QOALlTY lNS.PECTED~ This document conveys my advice and that of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on the strategic direction of the Armed Forces in implementing the guidance in the President's A National Security Strategy for a New Century and the Secretary's Report of the Quadrennial Defense Review.
We have just completed a year-long assessment of the strategic environment that underscored the continuing importance of robust American military power. While we no longer face the threat of a rival superpower, there are states and other actors who can challenge us and our allies conventionally and by asymmetric means such as terrorism and weapons of mass destruction. The rise of regional powers is leading to a multipolar world that can be either more secure or more dangerous -hence the importance of the President's "imperative of engagement" described herein.
The military has an important role in engagement -helping to shape the intemational environment in appropriate ways to bring about a more peaceful and stable world. The purpose of our Armed Forces, however, is to deter and defeat threats of organized violence to our country and its interests. While fighting and winning two nearly simultaneous wars remains the foremost task, we must also respond to a wide variety of other potential crises. As we take on these diverse missions, it is important to emphasize the Armed Forces' core competence: we fight. That must be the primary consideration in the development and employment of forces.
The Chiefs and I strongly agree that the force levels recommended by the Secretary in the QDR are the minimum necessary to carry out this strategy at prudent military risk. Further, we must begin to transform them now by exploiting technological advances that are changing warfare. To do this with forces that will remain committed to operational readiness, contingency operations and engagement activities requires a stabilized investment program and a fundamental re-engineering of support infrastructure. It also requires that we sustain the high quality men and women serving in the Armed Forces. They are the indispensable and decisive element in any strategy.
Our best judgment is that this strategy, Shape. Respond, Prepare Now: A Military Strategy for a New Era, and the forces for which it calls, will protect the Nation and its interests, and promote a peace that benefits America and all like-minded nations. f,-:~-,i---~\

~M~~ of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

TABLE OF CONTENTS Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . l Introduction ... 5 The Strategic Environment-Opportunities and Challenges ... 8 Regional Dangers ... 8 Asymmetric Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 Transnational Dangers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 "Wild Cards" . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . l 0 The Strategy-Shape, Respond, Prepare Now ... 11 National Military Objectives ... 11 Elements of the Strategy: Shape, Respond, and Prepare Now ... 12 Strategic Concepts ... 19 The Joint Force ... 21 Characteristics of a Full Spectrum Force ... 21 Today's Force ... 22 Conclusion ... 30

Executive

Summary

Introduction The National Military Strategy provides the advice of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS) in consultation with the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Combatant Commanders on the strategic direction of the Armed Forces over the next three to five years. In formulating the 1997 National Military Strategy, the CJCS derives guidance from the President's 1997 National Security Strategy and from the Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR) report prepared by the Secretary of Defense.

In both the 1997 National Security Strategy and the QDR report, the President and the Secretary of Defense introduced an integrated strategic approach embodied by the terms Shape, Respond and Prepare Now. The 1997 National Military Strategy is based on these concepts. It builds on the premise that the United States will remain globally engaged to Shape the intemational environment and create conditions favorable to US interests and global security. It emphasizes that our Armed Forces must Respond to the full spectrum of crises in order to protect our national interests. It further states that as we pursue shaping and responding activities, we must also take steps to Prepare Now for an uncertain future.

The Strategic Environment The United States has entered a period that presents both opportunities and challenges. Our nation is at peace and much of the world embraces the democratic ideals we cherish. The threat of nuclear war has diminished and diplomatic efforts continue to reap benefits in creating a more stable and peaceful world. Nonetheless, there remain a number of uncertainties, including potentially serious threats to America's security. Principal among these are regional dangers, asymmetric challenges, transnational threats, and "wild cards." This uncertain environment would be even more threatening without the American engagement and leadership that this strategy supports.
RaP0AT OF THE QUADRENNIAL


Shape,Respond, Now

and Prepare ... A Mi I itary Shat egy for a New Era The Strategy

National Military Objectives To defend and protect US national interests, our national military objectives are to Promote Peace and Stability and, when necessary, to Defeat Adversaries. US Armed Forces advance national security by applying military power as directed to help Shape the intemational environment and Respond to the full spectrum of crises, while we also Prepare Now for an uncertain future.



Elements of Strategy Shaping the Intemational Environment. US Armed Forces help shape the intemational environment through deterrence, peacetime engagement activi.ties, and active participation and leadership in alliances. Critical to deterrence are our conven.tional warfighting capabilities and our nuclear forces. Deterrence rests on a potential adversary's perception of our capabilities and commitment,


Page2 which are demonstrated by our ability to bring To defend decisive military power to and protect bear and by communica. US national tion of US intentions.
Engagement activities, interests, our including information national sharing between and contacts our military and military the armed forces of other objectives nations, promote trust are to and confidence and Promote encourage measures that increase our security and Peace and that of our allies, partners, Stability and ing friends. By increas.understanding and, when reducing uncertainty, necessary, to engagement builds con. Defeat structive security relation. Adversaries. ships, helps to promote the development of democ. ratic institutions, and helps keep some countries

from becoming adversaries tomorrow.
Responding to the Full Spectrum of Crises. The US military will be called upon to respond to crises across the full range of military operations, from humanitarian assistance to fighting and winning major theater wars (MTW), and conducting concurrent smaller-scale contingencies. Our demonstrated ability to rapidly respond and to decisively resolve crises provides the most effective deterrent and sets the stage for future operations if force must be used. Should deterrence fail, it is imperative that the United States be able to defeat aggression of any kind. Especially important is the ability to deter or defeat nearly simultaneous large.scale, cross-border aggression in two distant theaters in overlapping time frames, preferably in concert with allies. The ability to rapidly defeat initial enemy advances short of their objectives in two theaters in close succession reassures our allies and ensures the protection of our worldwide interests. We must also be prepared to conduct several smaller-scale contingency operations at the same time, as situations may dictate the employment of US military capabilities when rapid action is required to stabilize a situation.
Preparing Now for an Uncertain Future. As we move into the next century, it is imperative that the United States maintain the military superiority essential to our global leadership. Our strategy calls for transformation of our doctrine and organi. zations and a stabilized investment program in robust modemization that exploits the Revolu.


As we move tions in Military Affairs


into the next (RMA) and Business century, it is Affairs (RBA). imperative Strategic Concepts

that the National Military



United States Strategy describes four maintain the strategic concepts that govem the use of our

military forces to meet the


superiority demands of the strategic essential to environment. Strategic Agility is the timely con.


our global centration, employment


leadership. and sustainment of US military power anywhere, at our own ini.tiative, and at a speed and tempo that our adversaries cannot match. It is an impor.tant hedge against the uncertainty we face. It allows us to conduct

multiple mis. sions, across the full range of military operations, in geographically separated regions of the world. Overseas Presence is the visible posture of US forces and infrastructure strategically positioned forward, in and near key regions. Forces present overseas promote stability, help prevent conflict, and ensure the protection of US interests. Our overseas presence demonstrates our determination to defend US, allied, and friendly interests while ensuring our ability to rapidly concentrate combat power in the event of crisis. Power Projection is the ability to rapidly and effectively deploy and sus.tain US military power in and from multiple, dis.persed locations until conflict resolution. Power projection provides the flexibility to respond swiftly to crises, with force packages that can be adapted rapidly to the environment in which they must oper.ate, and if necessary, fight their way into a denied theater. Decisive Force is the commitment of suf.ficient military power to overwhelm an adversary, establish new military conditions, and achieve a political resolution favorable to US national inter.ests. Together, these four strategic concepts emphasize that America's military must be able to employ the right mix of forces and capabilities to provide the decisive advantage in any operation.

The Joint Force Our Armed Forces are the preeminent military force in the world, persuasive in peace and decisive in war. To successfully implement our strategy of shaping, responding, and preparing, the forces and capabilities recommended in the QDR report are essential. Equally critical to the success of our strategy are the men and women who comprise our military forces. We must continue to recruit, train, and maintain a high quality force to ensure our nation's security. Our forces must maintain the high state of readiness that is essential to global leadership; thus the means by which we achieve, maintain, and evaluate our readiness demand con.tinued emphasis. Our military must be ready to fight as a coherent joint force --fully interoperable and seamlessly integrated. Capitalizing on technol.ogy will also be central to maintaining military supe.riority. Our modemization Our Armed effort will focus on those technologies that improve Forces are the combat effectiveness of the our Armed Forces while preeminent enhancing the interoper.ability and integration of military the Total Force. Modem. force in the ization is not an end in world, itself, but a means to improve the capabilities persuasive in of our warfighters across peace and the full range of military decisive in operations --from peace.time engagement activities war. to war.


Conclusion The National Military Strategy of Shaping, Responding, and Preparing Now addresses the challenges and opportunities that confront us now as well as those that await


us as we approach the next century. Working with our allies, partners, and friends, we will pro.mote peace in an increas.ingly complex and poten.tially more dangerous world. This strategy will ensure that the US mili.tary will remain capable of performing whatever tasks we are called upon to perform around the world in the years ahead.




Introduction


The National Military Strategy (NMS) provides advice from the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS), in consultation with the Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) and the Combatant Commanders, to the National Command Authorities (NCA) on the strategic direction of the Armed Forces. Based on

A National Security Strategy for a New Century, approved by the President in May 1997, and the report of the Secretary of Defense to Congress of the 1997 QDR, the NMS describes the strategic environment, develops national military objectives and the strategy to accomplish those objectives, and describes the military capabilities required to execute the strategy. As an unclassified document, it makes this advice accessible to the widest range of govemment officials, interested citizens, and foreign leaders.
Purpose of the Armed Forces The President's 1997 National Security Strategy advances the Nation's fundamental and enduring security needs: protection of the lives and safety of Americans; maintenance of the sover.eignty of the United States, with its val.ues, institutions and territory intact; and provision for the prosperity of the Nation and its people. It further establishes as a core objective "to enhance our security with effective diplomacy and with military forces that are ready to fight and win."
The Armed Forces are the Nation's military instrument for ensuring our security. Accordingly, the primary purpose of US Armed Forces is to deter threats of organized violence against the United States and its interests, and to defeat such threats should deterrence fail. The military is a complementary element of national power that stands with the other instruments wielded by our govemment. The Armed Forces' core competence is the ability to apply decisive military power to deter or def eat aggression and achieve our national security objectives.
Fighting and Winning Our Nation's Wars Our Armed Forces' foremost task is to fight and win our Nation's wars. Consequently, America's Armed Forces are organized, trained, equipped, main.tained, and deployed primarily to ensure that our Nation is able to defeat aggression against our coun.try and to protect our national interests.
Protecting US National Interests US national interests fall into three categories. First in priority are our vital interests --those of broad, overriding importance to the survival, security, and

Integrating the NSS and the NMS

Purpose Document Provides Grand National Strategy and

Security Overarching National

Strategy (NSS) Goals and Objectives Describes How the Military Capabilities of National US Armed Forces are Military Used


Strategy (NMS) to Support the National Security Objectives territorial integrity of the United States. At the direction of the NCA, the Armed Forces are prepared to use decisive and overwhelming force, unilaterally if necessary, to defend America's vital interests. Second are important interests -those that do not affect our national survival but do affect our national well-being and the character of the world in which we live. The use of our Armed Forces may be appropriate to protect those interests. Third, armed forces can assist with the pursuit of humanitarian interests when conditions

exist that compel our nation to act because our values demand US involvement. In all cases, the commitment of US forces must be based on the importance of the US interests involved, the potential risks to American troops, and the appropriateness of the military mission.

Throughout our history, America's Armed Forces have responded to a variety of national needs other than waging wars. The security environment we face includes threats to our country and to our interests that are not "war" in the classical sense, and yet may call for military forces. Terrorism, weapons of mass destruction (WMD), illegal drug.trafficking, and other threats at home or abroad Page6 may exceed the capacity of other agencies and require the use of military forces, depending upon applicable law, the direction of the NCA, and the national interest involved. In addition, military resources will continue to support civil authorities in executing missions such as civil works, disaster relief, and domestic crises.
The Imperative of Engagement The President's National Security Strategy for a New Century stresses "the imperative of engagement" and enhancing our security through integrated approaches that allow the Nation to Shape the intemational environment; Respond to the full spectrum of crises; and Prepare Now for an uncertain future. Our strategic approach uses all appropriate instruments of national power to influence the actions of other states and nonstate actors, exert global leadership, and remain the preferred security partner for the community of states that share our interests. The Armed Forces play a key role in this effort. The United States' unparalleled military capabilities form the foundation of mutually beneficial alliances and security partner. ships, undergird stabili. Our global ty in key regions, and engagement buttress the current worldwide climate of con. makes the fidence that encourages world safer peace, economic growth, for our and democratization.
Our global engagement Nation, our makes the world safer for citizens, our Nation, our citizens, interests, and our interests, and our values. our values.

A Posture of Global Engagement Because America is

Peacetime engaged worldwide, even military in peacetime, significant portions of our Armed

engagement Forces are present over.

encompasses seas or readily available all military to deploy overseas, where many of our interests are activities found. This posture of involving global engagement and other nations the activities of our forces deployed around the

intended to world help shape the shape the intemational environ.security ment by promoting sta. bility and the peaceful

environment resolution of problems,

in peacetime. deterring aggression, and helping to prevent conflict. They also pre.serve our access to important infrastructure, position our military to respond rapidly to emerging crises, and serve as the basis for concerted action with others.
Peacetime Military Engagement Peacetime military engagement encompasses all military activities involving other nations intended to shape the security environment in peacetime. Engagement is a strate.gic function of all our Armed Forces, but it is a particularly important task of our forces overseas --those forward stationed and those rota.tionally or temporarily deployed. Engagement serves to demonstrate our commitment; improve interoperability; reassure allies, friends and coali.tion partners; promote transparency; convey demo.cratic ideals; deter aggression; and help relieve sources of instability before they can become mili.tary crises.
The text that follows describes our strategic ends, ways, and means. After summarizing the near. term strategic environment from a military perspective, it then describes the "ends:" the national military objectives that support the President's national security strategy and the

Secretary's QDR defense strategy. Next, it outlines the "ways" by which the military pursues these objectives according to the integrated approaches of Shaping, Responding, and Preparing Now, and the supporting military strategic concepts. Finally, the NMS describes the necessary "means:" the joint forces required to carry out the strategy.





TheNMS

TheStrategic -and Challenges EnvironmentOpportunities Although the United States currently enjoys relative peace and security, the strategic environment remains complex and potentially dangerous. The threat of global war has receded. Former adver.saries now cooperate with us across a range of security issues, and many countries view the United States as the security partner of choice. Our core values of representative democracy and market economics are embraced in many parts of the world, creating new possibilities for enduring peace, prosperity, and cooperation among nations. We are not confronted by a "peer competitor" --a hostile power of similar strength and capability -.nor are we likely to be in the near future. Given the United States' military potential and ability to deploy to any region of conflict, it is also unlikely tial for violence. Regional conflict remains possible, proliferation of weapons of mass destruction is a major concem, and we face a number of nontradi. tional, transnational, and unpredictable threats to our security.

Regional Dangers The potential for conflict among states and groups of states remains our most serious security challenge. Despite the best efforts of engagement, it is likely that more than one aspiring regional power will have both the desire and means to challenge the United States militarily. Iran, Iraq, and North Korea cur.rently pose this challenge, with no guarantee that these threats will diminish significantly soon.


our military alliances to new realities and building security relationships with new coalition partners. There are, nonetheless, significant challenges. Ethnic, economic, social, and environmental strains continue to cause instability and the paten-Page8 intimidating US allies and friends, pursuing inter.ests hostile to our own, and developing asymmetric capabilities, including nuclear, biological, and chem.ical weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and the means to deliver them. With instant global commu.nications, geographically-separated aggressors could easily coordinate hostile actions. Failed and failing states, and conflict that is not directed against the United States, can also threaten our interests and the safety of our citizens.
Asymmetric Challenges Some state or nonstate actors may resort to asym.metric means to counter the US military. Such means include unconventional or inexpensive approaches that circumvent our strengths, exploit our vulnerabilities, or confront us in ways we

Some state or cannot match in kind. nonstate Of special concem are terrorism, the use or actors may threatened use ofWMD,

resort to and information war.asymmetric fare. These three risks in particular have the means . .. potential to threaten the

unconventional US homeland and popu.or inexpensive lation directly and to deny us access to criti. approaches cal overseas infrastruc.

that ture. Other challenges circumvent our include exploiting com.mercial and foreign strengths, space capabilities,

exploit our threatening our space.vulnerabilities, based systems, inter.rupting the flow of criti. or confront us cal information, denying

in ways we our access to strategic cannot match resources, and envi.ronmental sabotage. in kind.
Hostile actors may use

such means by themselves or in conjunction with conventional military force. Such asymmetric chal.lenges are legitimate military concems. We must increase our capabilities to counter these threats and adapt our military doctrine, training, and equipment to ensure a rapid and effective joint and interagency response.
Transnational Dangers The security environment is further complicated by challenges that transcend national borders and threaten our national interests. Human emergencies other than armed conflict; extremism, ethnic disputes, and religious rivalries; intemational organized crime, including illegal trade in weapons, strategic materials or illicit drugs, as well as piracy; massive refugee flows; and threats to the environment each have the potential to put US interests at risk. These challenges can obstruct economic growth and democratic development and lead to conflict. Complicating the situation is the continued blurring of the distinction between terrorist groups, factions in ethnic conflicts, insurgent movements, intemational criminals, and drug cartels. Failure to deal with such security concems early in their development may require a more substantial response to a more dangerous problem later.

"Wild Cards"

We can never know with certainty where or when the next conflict will occur, who our next adversary will be, how an enemy will fight, who will join us in a coalition, or precisely what demands will be placed on US forces. A number of "wild card" threats could emerge to put US interests at risk. Such threats range from the emergence of new technologies that neutralize some of our military capabilities, to the loss of key allies or alliances and the unexpected overthrow of friendly regimes by hostile parties. While an individual "wild card" may appear unlikely, the number of possible "wild cards" make it more likely that at least one of them will occur with disproportionately high conse.quences. While asymmetric challenges and transnational dangers are serious in themselves, a particularly grave "wild card" is the combination of several such threats. Acting in collusion with other hostile entities, for example, an adversary might attempt to combine multiple asymmetric means with the seizure of a strategic objective before we could respond. Such an attack .

The strategic timed to avoid US environment forces while they are committed facing us is elsewhere, and complex, supported by dynamic, and diplomatic and propaganda uncertain . . . It is efforts -could be in this directed against environment an important national interest. that the United This could criti.
States Armed cally undermine Forces must US will, credibili.ty, access, and carry out their influence in the tasks to protect world.
America and its The strategic envi. interests. ronment facing us is complex, dy.namic, and uncertain. If the United States were to withdraw from intemational commitments, forsake its leadership responsibilities, or relinquish military superiority, the world would become more danger.ous and the threats to US interests would increase. It is in this environment that US Armed Forces must carry out their tasks to protect America and its interests.

TheShategy-Shape,Respond, Now Prepare Our National Military Strategy depends first and foremost upon the United States remaining secure from extemal threats. A secure homeland is fundamental to US global leadership; however, it is not the only prerequisite. To protect and promote US national interests, our national military objectives are to Promote Peace and Stability and, when necessary, to Defeat Adversaries that threaten the United States, our interests, or our allies. US Armed Forces advance national security by applying military power to Shape the intemational environment and Respond to the full spectrum of crises, while we Prepare Now for an uncertain future.
National Military Objectives Promote Peace and Stability.


Promoting peace and stability means creating and sustaining security conditions globally, and in key regions, that allow the peaceful pursuit of our interests and the just resolution of intemational problems through political means. This does not imply a resistance to change; rather, it underscores a desire for peaceful change. Pursuit of this objective supports the President's 1997 National Security Strategy by ensuring that no critical region is dominated by a power hostile to the United States and that regions of greatest importance to the US are stable and at peace. Such stability reduces the likelihood of widespread conflict and allows the pursuit of our interests by other instruments of national power. Where a potential regional hegemon threatens our interests and those of our allies through the buildup or use of armed forces, US military power may be concentrated to assure allies and friends, redress the imbalance, and deter or defeat aggression. Where the risk to peaceful political intercourse stems from other sources, US forces may conduct operations or otherwise contribute to efforts that seek to prevent conflict and reduce threats. Our role as a global leader is underscored by US forces performing tasks that encourage other nations to resolve problems through negotiation and compromise rather than by aggression and intimidation.
Defeat Adversaries. In the event of armed conflict, US Armed Forces will render an adversary incapable

of armed resistance through destruction of his capacity to threaten our interests or by breaking his will to do so. This sets the military conditions for winning the peace. In conducting combat operations, the United States will use all means available, commensurate with the national interest at stake, the risks involved, and intemational law. We will endeavor to commit decisive force to ensure that we achieve the objectives established by the NCA and conclude hostilities in the shortest time possible and on terms favorable to the United States.
Elements of the Strategy: Shape, Respond, Prepare Now

US Armed Forces pur.US Armed sue these national mili.tary objectives in sup.
Forces help port of the President's

shape the integrated approaches intemational of shaping, responding, and preparing now,

environment which synchronize all

primarily elements of national through their power to achieve our security objectives. Our inherent use of military force

deterrent should be guided by qualities and several considerations.
First, military force

through should be used judi.

peacetime ciously and decisively. military missions must be clearly stated, with

engagement. achievable military ob.jectives that support national political aims. Second, on most occasions, our forces will operate as a joint team, harmonizing the unique and com.plementary strengths and capabilities of each of our Services. Third, while retaining unilateral capabil.ity, whenever possible we must seek to operate alongside alliance or coalition forces, integrating their capabilities and capitalizing on their strengths. Finally, we must ensure that the conditions neces.sary for terminating military involvement and with.drawing military forces are clearly established.

Shaping the Intemational Environment. US Armed Forces help shape the intemational environment primarily through their inherent deterrent qualities and through peacetime military engagement. The shaping element of our strategy helps foster the institutions and intemational relationships that constitute a peaceful strategic environment by promoting stability; preventing and reducing conflict and threats; and deterring aggression and coercion.
Promoting Stability. Through peacetime engagement activities, US Armed Forces promote regional stability, increase the security of allies and friends, build coalitions, and ensure a more secure global environment. The commanders-in.chief of our unified commands, based on guidance

Page12 defense cooperation activities, foreign military On any given day, the Total Force ... sales, the Intemational Military Education and


is deployed in support of 10 Joint/Combined Operations and participates in 11 exercises in over 70 countries. from the NCA and CJCS, develop plans and employ forces and personnel in peacetime to protect and promote US interests and regional security objectives.
Our intemational exercise program is one such activity. Exercises enhance interoperability and readiness and demonstrate our ability to form and lead effective coalitions. They demonstrate our capabilities and resolve to friends and potential adversaries alike. They provide realistic conditions for working with the technologies, systems, and operational procedures that will be crucial in times of crisis. Intemational exercises also provide geographic familiarity and foster an understanding of cultures, values, and habits of other societies.
Exercises encourage burden sharing on the part of friends and allies, and facilitate regional integration.

Through other engagement activities, such as information sharing and a wide range of contacts between our military and the defense establish.ments of other nations, we promote trust and con.fidence and increase the security of our allies, partners, and friends. Partnership for Peace, Training (IMET) program, and other programs establish long-term professional relationships between our Armed Forces and the future mili.tary leadership of other countries. Military-to.military contacts with countries that are nei.ther staunch friends nor confirmed foes build constructive security relationships, help to promote the appropriate role of armed forces in a democratic society, and enhance stability.
Preventing or Reducing Through . ..
Conflicts and Threats. engagement Conflict prevention means the reduction, activities such mitigation, or neutral. as . .. ization of the causes of contacts conflict. Though the military by itself can between our rarely address the root military and causes of conflict --as the defense it often stems from political, economic, establishments social, and legal condi. of other tions that are beyond nations, we the core competence of the military to re. promote trust solve --military forces and confidence can provide a degree of and increase fundamental security and use their unique the security of operational and logisti. our allies, cal capabilities to help partners, and civil initiatives suc.ceed. Such military friends. operations can have important strategic value when they pro.

Deterrence rests mote the overall sta.

... on our bility the US seeks, demonstrated thus reducing the need for greater mili. ability and tary effort later.

willingness to The US effort to pre.

defeat potential vent conflict and

adversaries . . . reduce threats in.Our deterrence cludes arms control measures as an es. capability gives sential part. Verifi.

allies and able arms control friends the agreements, as well as confidence build.

confidence ing and transparency

necessary for measures, help re.normal political duce tensions and dangers. Military re. discourse and sources are an im .

peaceful portant component of resolution of this effort, particular.ly in the conduct of differences. reciprocal inspection, verification, and, in

some cases, enforcement activities. Bringing worldwide arsenals into conformity with intema. tional nonproliferation standards, helps to reduce uncertainty about potential threats, and allows countries to direct resources to safer, more pro. ductive relations. The United States remains committed to our obligations under bilateral and intemational arms control agreements. Expand. ing arms control efforts to address the use or pos. session of WMD, the development of WMD tech. nology, and the control and transfer of fissionable Page14 materiel are also extremely important to enhancing US security.
Peacetime Deterrence. Deterrence means preventing potential adversaries from taking aggressive actions

that threaten our interests, allies, partners, or friends. It is the military's most important contribution to the shaping element of the

President's strategy. Deterrence rests in large part on our demonstrated ability and willingness to defeat potential adversaries and deny them their strategic objectives. Our deterrence capability gives allies and friends the confidence necessary for normal political discourse and peaceful resolution of differences. The critical elements of deterrence are our conventional warfighting capabilities: forces and equipment strategically positioned, our capability to rapidly project and concentrate military power worldwide; our ability to form and lead effective military coalitions; and our capacity to protect our homeland, forces, and critical infrastructure from the full range of potential threats. Our strategic nuclear forces complement our conventional capabilities by deterring any hostile foreign leadership with access to nuclear weapons from acting against our vital interests. Our nuclear forces may also serve to convince such leaders that attempting to seek a nuclear advantage would be futile.

Responding to the Full Spectrum of Crises.
Given the strategic environment, the US military undoubtedly will be called upon to respond to crises across the full range of military operations, from humanitarian assistance to fighting and win.ning MTWs and conducting concurrent smaller.scale contingencies. US forces must be able to respond to crises from a posture of global engage.ment. In the event of a major theater war the United States will need to be extremely selective in undertaking substantial engagement activities and smaller-scale contingency operations. More than likely, we would have to disengage from activities and opera.

A credible US tions not deemed vital

force-in-being, in order to better pos.despite ture our forces to deter or defeat aggres. multiple sion in a second major

demands, is a theater war. A credi.key stabilizing ble US force-in-being, despite multiple de. influence in mands, is a key stabi.

the world. lizing influence in the world .. Responding to multiple concurrent contingencies requires careful consideration to ensure our forces are not dissipated and therefore either unable, or perceived as unable, to respond to more critical threats.
Deterring Aggression or Coercion in Crisis. The first response in any crisis normally consists of steps to deter an adversary so the situation does not require a greater US response. This generally involves signaling our commitment by enhancing our warfighting capability in a theater or by making declaratory statements to communicate US intentions and the potential cost of aggression to an adversary. We may also choose to emphasize our resolve by responding in a limited manner, for example, by enforcing sanctions or conducting limited strikes. The deterrent posture and activities

of our armed forces ensure we remain prepared for conflict should deterrence fail.
Fighting and Winning Major Theater Wars. As a global power with worldwide interests, it is imperative that the United States be able to deter and defeat nearly simultaneous, large-scale, cross.border aggression in two distant theaters in overlapping time frames, preferably in concert with regional allies. For the time being, we face this challenge in the Arabian Gulf region and in Northeast Asia. However, even should these challenges diminish, this capability is critical to maintaining our global leadership role. Lack of such a capability would signal to key allies our inability to help defend mutual interests, thus weakening our alliances and coalitions. Because such weakness would not escape the attention of potential adversaries, it might make two simultaneous crises more likely. US commitment


to one crisis would present the opportunity, otherwise unrealized, for another aggressor to act. Even more dangerous, it could inhibit the United States from responding to a crisis promptly enough, or even at all, for fear of committing our only forces and thereby making ourselves vulnerable in other regions of the world. The capability to fight two major theater wars initiated in rapid succession is of critical importance as it helps deter opportunism, promote stability, and provide the depth and flexibility to deal with unanticipated challenges.

In this regard, a particularly challenging requirement associated with fighting and winning major theater wars is being able to rapidly defeat initial enemy advances short of their objectives in two theaters in close succession, one followed almost immediately by another. Maintaining this capability is absolutely critical to our ability to seize the initiative in both theaters and to minimize the amount of territory we and our allies must regain from aggressors. Failure to halt an enemy invasion rapidly would make the subsequent campaign to evict enemy forces from captured Page16 territory much more difficult, lengthy, and costly. Such failure would also weaken coalition support, undermine US credibility, and increase the risk of conflict elsewhere.

Conducting Multiple, Concurrent Smaller-Scale Contingency Operations. Future challenges to our interests will likely require use of our forces in a wide range of concurrent operations short of major theater war. Swift action by military forces may sometimes be the best way to prevent, contain, or resolve conflict, thereby precluding greater effort and increased risk later. Using some of our unsur.passed capabilities in the pursuit of common inter.ests and values demonstrates leadership andá encourages confidence and greater contributions by others, reducing the demand on ourselves in the long run. US military forces provide a full array of capabilities that can be tailored to give the NCA many options in pur.suing our interests. Our capacity to per.
Swift action by

form shows of force, military forces

limited strikes, op.posed interventions, may sometimes no-fly zone and sanc. be the best way

tions enforcement to prevent,

operations, interposi.tion or observation contain, or operations, and other resolve conflict,

missions allows us thereby

to deter would-be aggressors and con.precluding trol the danger posed greater effort

by rogue states. US and increased

forces can perform peace operations and risk later. humanitarian assis.tance operations, and can evacuate noncombatants from ... we must dangerous situations, transform US

whether opposed or combat unopposed. us forces will act unilat. capabilities erally and in concert

and support with security part.structures, but ners, using all means authorized by the

while we do so President and the

our forces Congress, to counter must remain intemational terror.ism at home and engaged abroad. Unique mili.

worldwide . .. tary capabilities can also support domes. tic authorities in combating direct and indirect threats to the US homeland, such as the illegal drug trade, especial. ly when the potential for violence exceeds the capa. bility of domestic agencies.
Preparing Now for an Uncertain Future. As we move into the next century, it is imperative that the United States maintain the military superiority essential to our global leadership. To be able to respond effectively in the future, we must transform US combat capabilities and support structures, but while we do so, our forces must remain engaged worldwide and ready to fight and win two nearly simultaneous major theater wars. Success demands a stabilized investment program in robust modemization that exploits the RMA. It also requires fundamental reengineering of our infrastructure and streamlining of our support structures through the RBA to realize the cost efficiencies necessary to recapitalize the force. Though difficult to accomplish, such tasks are essential to reaching new levels of joint warfighting effectiveness.
Joint Vision 2010 is the conceptual template for joint operations and warfighting in the future. It provides the azimuth for the Services' visions, thus ensuring the future interoperability of the joint force. Because we will often act in concert with like.minded nations, as we implement JV 2010, we must also retain interoperability with our allies and potential coalition partners. This vision of future capabilit~es guides our warfighting requirements and procurement, and focuses technological development. JV 201 O's key enablers of information Joint Vision 201 O IIOl!INANt
IIANEIJVER PRECISION
ENGAGEMENT Joiat Forct1 CoaliJulnPwmns
FOCUSEDLOGISTICS Pf!OTECnoN
FULL-DIIIENSIONAL

Advanced

J--.1 Technologkls.. superiority and technological innovation will transform the current concepts of maneuver, strike, protection, and logistics into the new operational concepts of dominant maneuver, precision engagement, focused logistics, and full-dimensional protection. Tuming these concepts into reality will help us to conduct decisive operations in any environment, a characteristic JV 2010 calls "full spectrum dominance." JV 2010 rests on the foundations of information superiority and technological innovation.

Information Superiority. Information superiority is the capability to collect, process, and dissemi.nate an uninterrupted flow of precise and reliable information, while exploiting or denying an adver.sary's ability to do the same. While it is dependent upon superior technology, systems integration, organization and doctrine, it is not an inherent quality but, like air superiority, must be achieved in the battlespace through offensive and defensive information operations. Information superiority yields battlespace awareness, an inter.active, shared and highly accurate pic.

This ture of friendly and enemy operations as transformation they occur. Infor.

of our forces is mation superiority not a choice allows our comman.ders to employ wide. between people ly dispersed joint

and technology, forces in decisive but about how operations, engage and reengage with to integrate the appropriate force,

strengths of protect the force both to give the throughout the bat.tlespace, and con. nation the best duct tailored logisti.

possible cal support.

military Technological

capability.
Innovation. As we reshape our forces to meet the chal.lenges of a changing

world, we will leverage emerging technologies to enhance the capabilities of our servicemen and PageI8

women through development of new doctrine, orga.nizations, materiel, and training. Development and acquisition of new systems and equipment will improve our ability to conduct decisive operations and achieve full spectrum dominance. However, they are not a panacea. We must recognize that each includes inherent vulnerabilities; each must be applicable across the range of operations; and each must enhance the human capability of our forces.
Balanced Evolution. The fundamental challenge for our Armed Forces is to shape and respond in the

current and near-term security environment, while we concurrently prepare for the future. Because our forces are engaged worldwide every day, their transformation to achieve the new capabilities described in JV 2010 is necessarily evolutionary. Through a rigorous process of experimentation, assessment, refinement, and doctrinal development, we can meet our responsibility to maintain ready forces today while taking steps to transform those forces to be superior tomorrow. This transformation of our forces is not a choice between people or tech.nology, but about how to integrate the strengths of both to give the Nation the best possi.ble military capability. It involves much more than the acquisition of new military systems. It means har.nessing new technologies to give US forces greater military capabilities through advanced concepts, doctrine, and organizations so that they can dominate any future battlespace.
Strategic Concepts Strategic concepts are key ideas that govem our use of military force and forces as we execute the strategy of Shape, Respond, Prepare Now. These ideas are also important considerations that guide how our forces are trained, equipped, and organized.
Strategic Agility. Strategic agility is the timely concentration, employment, and sustainment of US military power any.where at our own ini.

Our forces must tiative, at a speed and

be able to seize tempo that our adver.and maintain saries cannot match. Our forces must be the momentum able to seize and

of operations maintain the momen.rapidly to meet tum of operations rapidly to meet multi. multiple ple demands in an

demands in an uncertain and com.uncertain and plex strategic environ.ment. Strategic agility complex requires our Armed

strategic Forces to be versatile, environment. that is, to conduct multiple missions simultaneously, across the full range of military operations, in geographically sep.arated regions of the world. This versatility, and the equally important abilities to orchestrate, com.mand, control, and support dispersed joint forces permit the decisive application of our strengths against enemy weaknesses. Strategic agility is essential if we are to remain globally engaged but not find ourselves improperly positioned or other.wise unable to respond to crises.

Overseas Presence. Overseas presence is the visible posture of US forces and infrastructure strategically positioned forward, in or near key regions. Permanently stationed and rotationally or temporarily deployed forces promote security and stability, prevent conflict, give substance to our security commitments, and ensure our continued access. Overseas presence enhances coalition operations by promoting joint and combined training and encouraging responsibility sharing on the part of friends and allies. Overseas presence contributes to deterrence by demonstrating our determination to defend US, allied, and friendly interests in critical regions while enabling the US to rapidly concentrate military power in the event of crisis. The presence of our forces provides commanders with a flexible array of options to respond promptly to aggression. Overseas presence forces embody global military engagement. They serve as role models for militaries in emerging democracies; contribute uniquely to the stability, continuity, and flexibility that protects US interests; and are crucial to continued democratic and economic development.

Power Projection. Power projection is the ability to rapidly and effectively deploy and sustain US forces in and from multiple, dispersed locations. Complementing overseas presence, power projec.tion strives for unconstrained global reach. Power projection assets are tailored to regional require.ments and send a clear signal of US commitment. Being able to project power means being able to act even when we have no permanent presence or infra.structure in a region. If necessary, it means fighting our way into a denied theater or creating and pro.tecting forward operating bases. The ability to assemble and move to, through, and between a vari.ety of environments, often while reconfiguring to meet specific mission requirements, is essential Global power to offsetting an adversary's projection advantages in mass or geo. provides our graphic proximity. Global power projection provides national our national leaders with leaders with the options they need to the options respond to potential crises. they need to Decisive Force. Decisive respond to force is the commitment of sufficient military power to potential overwhelm all armed crises. resistance in order to establish new military conditions and achieve political objectives. In cases not involving armed resistance, decisive force means that US forces will be wholly sufficient to accomplish the full scope of their military tasks. Decisive force in the early stages of a crisis can be critical to deterring aggression. The concept does not promise quick or bloodless solutions to military challenges, but does require that, where the actual commitment of military power is anticipated, such force will be clearly superior to that of any potential adversary.


Page20 TheJointforce To execute this strategy the United States requires forces of sufficient size, depth, flexibility, and combat power to defend the US homeland; main.tain effective overseas presence; conduct a wide range of concurrent engagement activities and able to transition smoothly from a peacetime pos.ture to swift execution of multiple missions across the full spectrum of operations. They require the correct mix of capabilities between and within the Services, and among conventional, nuclear, and special operations forces. In addition, our armed forces must strike an appropriate balance between smaller-scale contingencies, including peace oper. ations; and conduct decisive campaigns against adversaries in two distant, overlapping major theater

the exploitation of advanced technology and the recogni.

wars, all in the face of tion that most military mis.WMD and other asymmet.sions remain manpower ric threats. This section intensive. The wide range of describes the "full spec.likely military operations trum" forces needed to demands that our forces be meet these core require.able to quickly shift from ments, including their one type of operation to three key characteristics; another. They must also their general size and com.retain their ability to oper.position; their overseas ate successfully despite an posture and readiness; and the capabilities and strategic enablers essential to the execution of this strategy.
Characteristics of a Full Spectrum Force US Armed Forces as a whole must be multi-mission capable; interoperable among all elements of US Services and selected foreign militaries; and able to coordinate operations with other agencies of govemment, and some civil institutions.
Multi-Mission Capable. Our forces must be profi.cient in their core warfighting competencies and adversary's use of asymmet.ric means. The leadership, discipline, organization, and training inherent in maintaining our core warfighting competencies are the foundation of our ability to adapt readily and efficiently to the chal.lenges peculiar to a wide variety of smaller-scale contingencies.
Joint. Each Service, including the US Coast Guard when assigned, brings its own set of capabilities and strengths to a mission. Some situations demand the unique capabilities of only one Service, but most will call for capabilities from all Services. The skillful and selective combination of Service capabilities into Joint Task Forces provides US com-manders great flexibility in tailoring forces to meet


national objectives given specific circumstances. As important, it presents an enemy with an over.whelming array of capabilities against which to defend. A fully joint force requires joint operational concepts, doctrine, tactics, techniques, and proce. dures -as well as institutional, organizational,

intellectual, and system interoperability -so that all US forces and systems operate coherently at the strategic, operational, or tactical levels. Joint effec.tiveness does not mean that individual pieces of equipment or systems are identical, but rather that commanders are not constrained by technical or doctrinal barriers among the components of the joint force, and that the joint force's capability is dramatically enhanced by the blending of comple. mentary Service capabilities.
Interoperable. All elements of US joint forces must be able to work together smoothly. Success on the battlefield will depend on the operational and tactical synergy of integrated, agile Service forces. Although we must retain the capability to act unilaterally, we prefer to act in concert with our friends and allies. Laying a solid foundation for doctrinal and technological development with our key allies and to combined training events and exercises that contribute to interoperability.

interoperability with our alliance and potential coalition partners is fundamental to effective combined operations. We remain committed to Page22

It is imperative that our Joint Forces also enhance their ability to operate in consonance with other US govemment agencies, and with Non-govemmental Organizations (NGOs), Intemational Organizations (I Os), and Private Voluntary Organizations (PVOs) in a variety of settings. The specialized access and knowledge these organizations possess can facilitate prompt, efficient action to prevent conflict, resolve a crisis, mitigate suffering, and restore civil govem.ment upon conflict termination. Achieving intera.gency and civil interoperability through the continu.ing development of our doctrine and interagency par.ticipation in our training exercises is important to the unity of effort upon Success on which success in many the~ missions depends. battlefield will depend Today's Force on the Total Force. The operational Total Force requires the and tactical unique contributions of its Active and Reserve synergy of Components and its civil. integrated, ian employees. All ele. agile Service ments of the Total Force must be appropriately forces. organized, modemized, trained, and integrated. As described in the QDR report, the Total Force required to carry out the President's 1997 National Security Strategy and this supporting military strat.egy at prudent military risk includes:
Army -Four active corps All elements with ten active divisions of the Total (six heavy, two light infantry, one airbome, Force must be and one air assault); and appropriately two active armored cav.organized, alry regiments; fifteen National Guard enhan. modemized, ced separate brigades; trained and the capability provided integrated. by appropriately restruc. tured National Guard combat divisions; and other appropriate forces.
Navy -Twelve aircraft carriers, eleven air wings, twelve amphibious ready groups, 116 surface com.batant ships, 50 attack submarines, and augmen.tation forces of the Naval Reserve.
Air Force -A total fleet of 187 bombers, just over 12 active fighter wing equivalents, eight reserve com.ponent fighter wing equivalents, and four National Guard dedicated continental air defense squadrons (other forces will be used to handle the US air sov.ereignty mission) together with the currently pro.grammed tanker and airlift fleets.


National Military Strategy Marine Corps -Three active Marine Expeditionary Forces (MEF) each comprised of a command ele.ment, a division, an aircraft wing, and a service support group. The active force will continue to be augmented and reinforced by one Reserve divi.sion/wing/service support group.
Coast Guard -Approximately 50,000 active and reserve personnel and 43 medium-and high. endurance cutters.
Civilians -Approximately 640,000 men and women whose support is essential to the maintenance of our readiness. From depot workers to senior-level leaders, they work together to perform functions ranging from policy direction to maintenance of our total force.
Special Operations Command -A joint special operations force consisting of approximately 47,000 Army, Navy and Air Force active and reserve personnel.
Reserve Components. The Reserve Components, in addition to being essential participants in the full range of military operations, are an important link between the Armed Forces and the public. Mobilization of the Reserve Components has always been an important indicator of the commitment of national will.
Guardsmen and reservists are not

only integrated into war plans, but also provide critical skills in carrying out contingency operations, as well as augmenting and supporting active units during peacetime. National Guard and other Reserve Component elements also provide the NCA with a Page23

strategic hedge against uncertainty and with an organized basis to expand our Armed Forces if necessary. Additionally, they also provide a rotational base to ease the tempo of unit and individual deployments for the Active Component.
Posture. Most US forces are based in CONUS but are continuously available for deployment. We will maintain roughly 100,000 military per.sonnel in both the ... readiness European and Pacific instills in our regions. Additionally, we will maintain an people the appropriate presence

confidence in the Arabian Gulf needed to region to deter threats to our interests there. succeed in a These forces signal our

wide variety of commitment to peace challenging and stability in these regions. They affirm situations. our leadership of important alliances and allow us to help

shape allied defense capabilities. They underscore our commitment to remain engaged as a stabilizing influence, reinforce our bilateral relations with key partners, alleviate the potential for destabilizing arms races, underwrite deterrence in key regions and strengthen our voice in intemational forums.
Readiness. The readiness of US military forces to meet the full range of missions has never been more important. Ready forces provide the flexibility needed to shape the global environment, deter potential foes and, if required, to rapidly respond to a broad spectrum of crises and threats, including Page24 major theater wars. In addition, readiness instills in our people the confidence needed to succeed in a wide variety of challenging situations. Each Service has a different approach to readiness, due to unique force characteristics, contingency plans, response requirements, peacetime forward deployment levels, the availability of training infrastructure and perishable skills. The Services will maintain readiness sufficient to meet the most demanding deployment requirements while seeking sensible management practices that conserve resources and mitigate the potential negative effects of high operational and personnel tempos.
Capabilities. As noted throughout this NMS, the US military must have capabilities that give the national leadership a range of viable options for pro.moting and protecting US interests in peacetime, crisis, and war. The Joint Force must be able to defeat adversaries in two distant, overlapping major theater wars from a posture of global engagement and in the face of WMD and other asymmetric threats. It must respond across the full spectrum of crises, from major combat to humanitarian assis.tance operations. It must be ready to conduct and sustain multiple, concurrent smaller-scale contin.gency operations. In addition to these core require.ments, US Armed Forces provide the NCA with sev.


... our forces eral equally important

must be able capabilities.

to conduct Strategic Deterrence.

and sustain Credible standing nuclear operations and conventional forces cause potential adver. that saries to consider the

accomplish consequences of pursu.US objectives, ing aggression. Although most nuclear powers con. promote post. tinue to reduce their

conflict arsenals, our triad of stability, and strategic forces serves as a vital hedge against an prevent the uncertain future, a guar.

recurrence of antor of our security conflict. commitments to our allies, and a deterrent to those who would contem. plate developing or otherwise acquiring their own nuclear weapons. Strategic nuclear weapons remain the keystone of US deterrent strategy. A mix of forward deployable non-strategic nuclear and conventional weapons adds credibility to our commitments. Deterrence is further enhanced by the ability of US forces to attack targets even when access to regional bases may not be feasible or assured. Geography and political constraints on access will not restrict our ability to conduct long range, stand-off attacks against a full range of targets in hostile territory.
Decisive Operations. In situations such as an M1W, the Armed Forces must be able to gain the initiative quickly. Our forces must have the capability to halt an enemy; immediately initiate operations that further reduce his capacity to fight; and mount decisive operations to ensure we defeat him and accomplish our objectives. But wresting military initiative from the enemy is not the end of our commitment. From the onset of a crisis or conflict until termination, our forces must be able to conduct and sustain operations that accomplish US objectives, promote post-conflict stability, and prevent the recurrence of conflict.

Special Operations. The range of challenges to our security demands an ability to influence certain events with forces that are smaller and less visible than conventional formations, offering the NCA options that do not entail a major military commitment. Special Operations Forces provide this capability and offer unique skills, tactics, and systems for the execution of unconventional, potentially high-payoff missions.
Forcible Entry. The United States must be able to introduce military forces into foreign territory in a non-permissive environment. While the United States will pursue the cooperation of other govemments to allow US forces access, it must not assume that such cooperation will always be forthcoming. A forced entry capability ensures that the US will always be able to gain access to seaports, airfields, and other critical facilities that might otherwise be denied. It reassures allies that our ability to come to their aid cannot be denied by an enemy. It also allows future joint force commanders to retain operational freedom of action and gives the United States the ability to go anywhere that US interests require.


Force Protection. Multiple layers of protection for US forces and facilities at all levels, beginning at home, enable US forces to maintain freedom of action from predeployment through employment and redeployment. Fluid battlefields and the potential ability of adversaries to orchestrate asymmetric threats against our forces require that we seek every means to protect our forces. Comprehensive force protection requires the employment of a full array of active and passive measures. The variety of challenges that we will face may also require less than lethal technology to meet demands at the lower end of the range of military operations. Force protection initiatives must thus address all aspects of potential threats, Page26 to include terrorism, WMD, information operations, and theater ballistic and cruise missiles.
Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD). The continued proliferation of WMD, particularly chemical and biological weapons (CBW), has made their employment by an adversary increasingly like.ly in both major theater Fluid war and smaller-scale con.tingencies. US forces must battlefields have a counterproliferation and the capability balanced among potential the requirements to pre.vent the spread of WMD ability of through engagement activi. adversaries ties; detect an adversary's to possession and intention to use WMD; destroy WMD orchestrate before they can be used; asymmetric deter or counter WMD; pro.tect the force from the threats effects of WMD through against our training, detection, equip. forces ment, and immunization; require and restore areas affected that by the employment of WMD we seek through containment, neu. every means tralization, and decontami. to protect nation. Since many opera.tions will be conducted as our forces. part of an alliance or coali.tion, we must encourage our friends and allies to train and equip their forces for effective operations in environments where WMD usage is likely.
Focused Logistics. Military operations in today's environment require the ability to tailor logistics packages to meet operational and tactical requirements in hours or days. US forces must have the ability to link information, logistics, and transportation technologies together to permit continuous operations by leaner and more agile forces in any environment, including those contaminated by the effects of NBC agents. Joint sustainment initiatives such as Joint Total Asset Visibility, the Global Transportation Network, and the Global Combat Support System are deployable, automated supply and maintenance information systems that provide in-transit visibility, eliminate redundant requisitions and reduce delays in the shipment of essential supplies. In-transit visibility, in particular, is key to realizing the benefits of focused logistics. Our efficient use of these systems produces a smaller logistics tail that reduces the burden on transportation systems, requires fewer resources to defend, is more difficult

for an enemy to detect and target, and enhances our own mobility.
Information Operations. Success in any operation depends on our ability to quickly and accurately integrate critical information and deny the same to an adversary. We must attain information superi.ority through the conduct of both offensive and defensive information operations. Information


National Military Strategy operations are, however, Only the more than discrete of. most fensive and defensive actions; they are also the dedicated, collection and provision of well-trained that information to the personnel warfighters. Superiority in these areas will enable with.first commanders to contend class leaders with information threats will succeed to their forces, including attacks which may origi.in the nate from outside their complex and area of operations. It also fast-paced limits an adversary's free.dom of action by disabling environment his critical information of future systems. We are develop. military ing joint doctrine for offensive and defensive operations. information operations that assigns appropriate responsibilities to all agen.cies and commands for assuring committed forces gain and maintain information superiority. This emerging joint doctrine must fully integrate intera.gency participation allowing us to leverage all exist.ing information systems.
Strategic Enablers. A number of assets --strategic enablers --are critical to the worldwide application of US military power and our military strategy.
People. Our nation is committed to an All-Volunteer Force. Its people are the most important enabler of our strategy. The quality of this force is critical. Only the most dedicated, well-trained personnel with first class leaders will succeed in the complex and fast-paced environment of future military oper-ations. While modem technology enables our forces to perform their missions more effectively, it cannot substitute for high quality people. To recruit and retain people who meet high military standards, the quality of life of our military per.sonnel must be commensurate with the sacrifices we ask them to make. We must provide challenging career options, continual professional development, adequate compensation, medical care, housing, and a stable retirement system. To ensure the via.bility of the Reserve Components, we must work to safeguard their employment rights and provide

employers with incen.tives for continued sup... the quality of port. We must manage the tempo of opera. life of our tions, deployments and

military personnel transfers to personnel must avoid adverse effects on our people and their

be families. Sustaining

commensurate core warfighting com. with the petencies while adopt. sacrifices we ing new technologies ask them to and operational cepts also requires con.con . make. tinuous training and education. Finally, the defense of our country and the lives and welfare of our people should be

entrusted only to military leaders of honorable character who prove worthy of their profound responsibilities.
Robust All-Source Intelligence. A globally vigilant intelligence system that is able to operate in a com.plex environment with an increasing number of potential opponents and more sophisticated tech-Page28

nology is critical. Our Armed Forces require the timely collection, evaluation, and assessment of a full range of geo-political, socio-economic, and mil.itary information throughout the full spectrum of conflict. Our intelligence system must be capable of maintaining its global waming capabilities even while focusing on one or more crises. It must over.come increasingly varied means of deception and protect and secure its information channels. It must respond to the warfighters' needs during com.pressed decision cycles, and accommodate "smart" and "brilliant" weapons systems that pass targeting information directly to weapons platforms. The technical ability to deliver large quantities of intelli.gence to all levels without overwhelming comman.ders and leaders has enormous promise. However, quality intelligence remains equally dependent upon subjective human judgment, from collection and processing to production and dissemination.
Global Command and Control. Robust intelligence and assured information systems are also critical to the command and control of our forces. Global communications must allow for the timely exchange of information, data, decisions, and orders. The ability to gather, process, and disseminate an unin.terrupted flow of reli.able and precise infor.

Robust strategic mation under any sealift, air conditions is a tre.mendous strategic and mobility, and military advantage. A

ground secure C41SR (Com.transportation mand, Control, Com.munications, Comput. combined with ers, Intelligence, Sur.

prepositioned veillance and Recon .supplies and naissance) architec.ture must be designed equipment and developed from

ashore and the outset for rapid afloat, are deployment and with joint and multinat. critical ... ional interoperability in mind.

Air and Sea Control. The successful application of military power is dependent on uninhibited access to air and sea. Control of these mediums allows the United States to project power across great dis.tances, conduct military operations, and protect our interests around the world. Our forces will seek to gain superiority in, and dominance of, these mediums to allow our forces freedom to conduct operations and to protect both military and com.mercial assets.
Space Control. As we will continue to do at sea and in the skies, we will also endeavor to maintain our current technological lead in space as more users develop their commercial and military capabilities. It is becoming increasingly important to guarantee access to and use of space as part of joint opera.tions and to protect US interests. Space control capabilities will ensure freedom of action in space and, if directed, deny such freedom of action to adversaries.
Strategic Mobility. Robust strategic sealift, air mobility, and ground transportation combined with prepositioned supplies and equipment ashore and afloat, are critical to maintaining strategic agility. In addition our forces will normally require access to US and overseas support infrastructure to maintain our ability to project power in times of crises. Enroute infrastructure will assist our forces in rapidly establishing and positioning themselves to dominate any situation. Keeping pace with evolving technology in the transportation industry guarantees_ our mobility forces continued global reach. Strategic mobility enhancements like increased airlift capability, additional prepositioning of heavy equipment afloat and ashore, increased sealift surge capacity, and additional material handling equipment (MHE) will ensure strategic agility and facilitate our ability to protect our national interests and assist our allies when needed.


Conclusion This National Military Strategy, foundation of previous editions, President's A National Securi.ty Strategy for A New Century and the QDR report. It car.ries forward the theme that US military power is, and will continue to be, fundamental to ensuring our national security.
The United States will remain the world's only global power for the near-term, but will operate in a strategic envi.ronment characterized by rising regional powers, asymmetric challenges in.cluding WMD, transnational dangers, and the likelihood of wild cards that cannot be specifically predicted. The dangers we could face can be mitigated by military activi.ties that Shape the strategic environment and Respond to the full spectrum of crises, while Preparing our Armed Forces now for an uncertain future. The force structure described in this document and our overseas presence,

building on the strategic agility we supports the lenges we are likely In a time of both uncertainty and promise, this National Military Strategy and our Armed Forces

provide our Nation with the means to protect our interests and promote a peace that benefits America and all like-minded nations. will require to meet the chal.to face. As we pursue the President's strategy for enhancing our security in this new era, the demand for military capabili. ties and skills is unlikely to

diminish, both to deter and defeat aggression in two dis.tant and overlapping MTWs, and in roles other than tradi.tional warfighting. Our Armed Forces' core compe.tence --the ability to apply decisive military power to deter or defeat acts of aggres.sion --must remain the pri.mary consideration in deter.mining the structure, train.ing and employment of our military forces.
We cannot know with cer.tainty who our foes will be or where our forces will be needed in the future. In a time of both uncertainty and promise, this National Mili.tary Strategy and our Armed Forces provide our Nation with the means to protect our interests and promote

combined with our ability to rapidly project com. a peace that benefits America and all like-min~ed bat power anywhere in the world, provides the nations.
Page30




