Machine Translated by Google

Overseas security plan

June 27, 2016

1




Overseas departments and communities have experienced a significant increase in violence and attacks on property as well as incivility for several months. This evolution of delinquency and the strong feeling of insecurity which results from it but also the increasing share of minors and young adults in this phenomenon call for immediate and sustained mobilization from the State.

This involves ensuring lasting security for everyone, in each of our overseas territories. The solidity of the social pact and local development depend on it. This therefore requires a commitment from everyone, state services, elected officials, local authorities, the educational community and civil society actors, with a shared objective of prevention and resolute
fight against all forms of delinquency and in particular violence with weapons, violence in the family sphere, sexual assault, trafficking or the development of the underground economy.

Faced with these challenges, strengthened security govemance is required (Axis 1). Furthermore, it is necessary to further broaden the scope of the fight against insecurity (Axis 2) and to adapt the law enforcement system to the security issues encountered locally (Axis 3).

2




Axis 1: General mobilization and strengthened govemance

Action #1 Create a national conference for overseas security

A national conference, chaired by the Ministers of the Interior and Overseas and bringing together all stakeholders in overseas security (prefectures, local forces, central administrations, elected officials, experts) will meet twice a year in order to take stock of the actions taken to prevent and combat delinquency. The discussions and reflections held during this conference will make it possible to share and disseminate innovative measures adapted to the specificity of overseas territories with the aim of responding to the evolving security context.

Measure n2 Carry out a precise inventory of intemal security systems

Following on from the inspections carried out in Mayotte and New Caledonia, general inspections of the national police and gendarmerie will be requested during the second half of 2016 to carry out audits of local intemal security systems.
Proposals will thus be formulated relating to both the organizational field and the capability needs (personnel and materials necessary to improve the performance of the forces). The conclusions of this work will be presented by the inspections at the first national conference for overseas security.

Measure #3 Adapt priority security zones (ZSP)

In order to target the phenomena of entrenched delinquency as precisely as possible, the territorial bases of the current ZSPs will be evaluated and if necessary modified, or even expanded. New ZSPs may also see the light of day.

Measure no. 4 Enhance operational coordination between urban areas and territories (CORAT)

Operational protocols will be established in all departments and territories in order to respond more efficiently to delinquent phenomena, while respecting the specificities, territorial bases and statutes of intemal security forces. Closely managed by security staffs, these measures must concem the entire spectrum of delinquency as well as public order.
These protocols will include enhanced cooperation measures for one-off or scheduled operations, the creation of departmental anti-burglary units placed under the joint supervision of COMGEND and the DDSP and mutual support procedures to enable the increase in the rate of criminalistic coverage. crime scenes.

3




Measure n5 Strengthen links between the population and security forces

A departmental or territorial coordination unit dedicated to strengthening the link between the population and intemal security forces will be created in each of the departments and communities. Placed under the authority of the State representative, this unit will bring together all the services concemed as well as the main territorial actors, and in particular the educational community, social service assistants and associations working to prevent juvenile delinquency and dropout.

Measure no. 6 Support community actions and initiatives

The creation of CLSPD or CISPD in eligible municipalities that do not yet have these systems will be encouraged and supported by State services. Realistic and relevant territorial strategies will be developed again after consultations with local elected officials and the main players in delinquency prevention before January 2017.

Partnerships with municipalities will be encouraged and energized so that more coordination agreements with municipal and intermunicipal police forces are implemented. The same approach will be taken for citizen participation schemes.

Will also be reinforced:

- exchanges of information with elected officials on security issues;
- support for the development of video protection;
- the Vigi-maires protocols.

4




Axis 2: Expand the scope of the fight against insecurity

Measure no. 7 Coordinate the fight against drug trafficking and intensify the dismantling of networks

The fight against drug trafficking requires developing increased synergies between territorial forces (DDSP services, territorial gendarmerie units) and investigation services (central offices, judicial police, research sections and brigades). The creation of discussion meetings on the theme of the fight against narcotics involving all services will be encouraged with the aim of implementing actions contact details.

Depending on the analysis of local issues, these channels of reinforced cooperation could be extended by the creation of inter-service structures dedicated to the fight against drug trafficking. In Guyana, a detachment of the Caribbean branch of the Central Office for the Suppression of Intemational Drug Trafficking (OCRTIS) will be created before the end of 2016.

Finally, a particular effort will be made regarding the seizure of criminal assets.

Measure #8 Target illegal possession of firearms

In application of the national plan to combat illegally held weapons adopted by the Ministry of the Interior in November 2015, the directors of public security and the commanders of the gendarmerie, in close collaboration with the competent judicial authorities, will make an
effort to the following measures:

- develop the systematic use of a ballistic examination;

- adapt and adjust Lay down your weapons operations by involving elected officials and municipal police and after studying the local firearms problem;

- strengthen exchanges between administrative and judicial authorities for the issuance and monitoring of weapon possession authorizations;

- study the creation of a local group for dealing with delinquency on the theme of weapons.

Measure n9 Give real freedom of action to intemal security forces

In close collaboration with the locally competent judicial authorities, systems for the electronic transmission of legal procedures will be evaluated and, if necessary, developed, in order to significantly reduce the administrative burden on the security forces. Protocols can then be developed in all territories between the competent judicial authorities and the heads of investigative services.

5




Finally, videoconferencing equipment will be deployed in overseas investigation units and services in order to significantly reduce the costs generated by the extractions and presentations of people under legal duress.

Measure no. 10 Increase operational cooperation between the gendarmerie and the armed forces under the Ministry of Defense

Coordinated or joint operations between the gendarmerie and the armed forces of the Ministry of Defense will gradually be implemented in the overseas departments and communities. Placed under the authority of State representatives and COMSUPs, they may take the form of flow control operations, the fight against irregular immigration and the
fight against trafficking.

Measure no. 11 Create a projectable tactical group (GTP) overseas

In order to effectively deal with serious and occasional disturbances, or to support territorial services in dealing with specific delinquency problems, sending a suitable force from the mainland can prove decisive.

The DGPN and the DGGN will study, before October 2016, the methods of setting up and projecting a one-off support detachment of the projectable tactical group type, mobilizing multiple skills (judicial investigation, public order, planning and conduct of operations , etc.).

Measure no. 12 Take victims better into account and detect risky situations

In coordination with local authorities, the presence of social workers within police services and gendarmerie units will be significantly strengthened. by 2018 in each of the departments and communities, in accordance with the Interior-City agreement signed on September 27, 2013.

New synergies will be systematically sought by the security forces with associations and victim support structures, so that automatic reporting protocols are developed as quickly as possible.

Measure no. 13 Mobilize the FIPD-R for the benefit of overseas youth

Support from the FIPD-R will be sought in the areas of care and support for young people exposed to delinquency and violence. Associations providing assistance to victims and women victims of violence will also be able to benefit from it. with the aim of further expanding their support offering.

6




New calls for projects relating to the prevention of radicalization among young people will be carried out by September 2016 by the prefectures, so that systems can be put in place from 2017.

Measure no. 14 Fight against radicalization

The prefectures and high commissions will ensure the full implementation of the measures of the action plan against radicalization and terrorism (PART), the update of which was presented on May 9, 2016.

They will particularly ensure the creation of multidisciplinary networks to increase the number of cases of radicalized people or those in the process of being radicalized. As part of the radicalization monitoring and family support units, local capacities will be identified and coordinated, using the additional financial resources under the FIPD that the PART makes available to prefects.

Furthermore, partnerships with local authorities will be strengthened to increase the detection of radicalization phenomena thanks to the local action that they develop. Their assistance in providing first-level care for people in the process of radicalization will be sought in accordance with the provisions of the decree of May 6 relating to the prevention of delinquency and radicalization.

Finally, in accordance with the guidelines defined in the framework partnership agreement between the State and the AMF, it will be a matter of initiating a prevention process consisting of setting up social monitoring of these people as close as possible to their places of employment. life.

Finally, relationships of trust with representatives of the Muslim faith will make it possible to build an additional axis of prevention. The different paths of radicalization and the underlying religious discourse can be better understood. In addition, initiatives aimed at locally designing a counter-discourse will be supported while respecting the principle of secularism.

7




Axis 3: Adapt forces to security challenges

Measure no. 15 Strengthen the structures of the national police

As part of personnel movements and job creation, the operational needs of the national police overseas will be met in the years to come. Thus, for the year 2016, 160 positions in the management and enforcement corps were opened overseas and 210 security assistants will be assigned between
January 1 and September 1 , 2016.

Measure no. 16 Strengthen the numbers of the overseas gendarmerie

The overseas gendarmerie will benefit from 300 additional positions between 2017 and 2019, including
179 from 2017. These staff creations will complement the 63 positions created throughout 2016 and will make it possible to strengthen the intervention units, the brigades territories most affected by delinquency as well as certain research units.

Furthermore, the rise in power of the overseas territorial reserve will be continued.

Measure no. 17 Modemize communication networks

The national steering committee for shareable transmission infrastructure (INPT) in October 2015 validated the launch of studies for the establishment of digitized networks for security and emergency services in overseas territories, in prioritizing the department of Mayotte then that of Guyana. These two networks will be deployed by 2020 before being extended to other overseas territories.

Measure no. 18 Renovate the most dilapidated police headquarters

Beyond the CAYENNE police headquarters, the rehousing of which is planned, the services of the Ministry of the Interior will precisely identify all the renovation and upgrading needs so that the most urgent situations are dealt with as quickly as possible. next three-year program 2017/2019. The choice of selected operations will be made at the end of 2016, after consultation with all stakeholders. Particular attention will also be paid to the good condition of premises for deprivation of liberty.

8




Measure no. 19 Provide further support for the gendarmeries real estate operations

The granting of additional investment subsidies that can be granted to municipalities or local authorities which finance real estate construction operations will be studied and implemented from 2017.

Measure n20 Best protective equipment for law enforcement

An equipment plan will be developed, particularly for intervention and law enforcement units,
which will aim to:

- strengthen individual protective equipment, particularly ballistic equipment, for anti-crime

brigades and gendarmerie surveillance and intervention squads;

- equip intervention units with pedestrian cameras;
- study the methods of replacing armored gendarmerie vehicles. In this

Indeed, a specific working group will be set up by the DGGN;

- develop the installation of fixed LAPIs;
- adapt the vehicles of the units most exposed to phenomena of violence.

Finally, efforts to seize criminal assets will be continued and requests for assignment of seized property developed.

Measure no. 21 Make greater use of new intemal security technologies

The national drone equipment plan for the national gendarmerie will identify the operational needs of the overseas gendarmerie command in this area.

Drones of different capacities will be deployed on an experimental basis from 2017 depending on the needs expressed.

Measure no. 22 Develop regional cooperation with security forces foreign

In view of current and emerging threats, the national gendarmerie and police will develop, under the authority of State representatives, operational cooperation innovative regional partnerships with foreign security forces.

9