Defence Policy Guidelines 2023 Federal Ministry of Defence Policy Guidelines 2023

4

5 Table of Contents Defence Policy Guidelines for the Zeitenwende... 6 I...Defining Germany’s Position in Terms of Defence Policy... 8 II...Strategic Priorities in Defence Policy...12 ...II.1. Strengthening our Defence Capabilities ­and our Committment to the Alliance...13 ...II.2. Supporting Stability in Europe’s Neighbourhood...14 ...II.3. Contributing to Maintaining the Rules-Based Intemational Order...14 III...Core Task and Additional Tasks of the Bundeswehr...16 ...III.1. The Bundeswehr’s Core Task: ­National and Collective Defence...17 ...III.2. Task: Promoting Stability and Building up Resilient Partners as a Contribution to Intemational Crisis Management...17 ...III.3. Task: Defence Diplomacy, Intemational Cooperation and Partnership ...18 ...III.4. Task: Homeland Security and Support Functions...18 IV...Requirements for the Overall Military Defence Concept...20 ...IV.1. Requirements for Military-Strategic Implementation...21 ...IV.2. Requirements for Strategic and Conceptual Implementation...23 V...Fundamental Principles for an ­Effective Bundeswehr of the Future...26 ...V.1. A Common Concept of Robustness...27 ...V.2. Personnel...28 ...V.3. Organisation...29 ...V.4. Infrastructure...30 ...V.5. Budget and Finances...30 ...V.6. Sustainability and Climate Change...31 ...V.7. Armaments Policy and Procurement...31

6 War has retumed to Europe. Germany and its al­ lies must once again confront a military threat.
The intemational order is being attacked in Eu­ rope and around the world. We are experiencing a tuming point, or Zeitenwende, as it is called in Germany.
This Zeitenwende has fundamentally changed the role of Germany and the Bundeswehr. As the most populous nation and a strong economy in the heart of Europe, we have a responsibility. We must be the backbone of deterrence and collective defence in Europe. Our citizens as well as our partners in Eu-rope, North America and the rest of the world ex-pect us to take on this responsibility.
As a nation and as a society, we have neglected the Bundeswehr for decades. For too long, we were un-able to imagine the scenario of a war on European soil and a direct threat to our country. The Bundes-wehr was geared towards intemational crisis man-agement operations abroad. Common structures and capabilities necessary for national and collec-tive defence were abandoned.
This is a trend that we must reverse. We are retum-ing the focus of the Bundeswehr to its core task: modem national and collective defence. We are cre-ating the necessary structures for credible defence within NATO and for ensuring the Bundeswehr has the equipment it needs in good time. We are laying the foundations for a Bundeswehr with new capabil-ities and the capacity to take on new tasks.
By permanently deploying a combat brigade in Lithu-ania, we are contributing to the security of our allies.
Just like, for decades, Allied forces did in Germany.
This is how we show leadership and responsibility.
At the same time, we cannot and will not ignore what is happening in the world around us. Crises and conflicts are intensifying in our neighbourhood

Defence Policy Guidelines for the Zeitenwende “In this Zeitenwende, the significance the Bundeswehr has for our country ­becomes particularly clear. Becomes clear again. And we realise that we must ­reorient the focus of our Bundeswehr towards national and collective defence, and we must measurably increase its operational and deterrence capability – so that we may continue to live in freedom and peace.”

Speech held by the Federal Minister of Defence on the occasion of the Solemn Pledge Ceremony at the Bendlerblock,
20 July 2023

7 Federal Minister of Defence, Boris Pistorius Chief of Defence, General Carsten Breuer as well. The brutal and inhumane attack by Hamas on Israel is a devastating example of this. What is more, years of Bundeswehr operations in the West-em Balkans and in the Sahel region as well as the noncombatant evacuation operation in Sudan have shown us that we must continue to be prepared to assume responsibility intemationally with our part-ners and maintain our ability to act.
These Defence Policy Guidelines will set the course for the Bundeswehr in the Zeitenwende. As de-mands on the Bundeswehr increase, so do our ex-pectations for the Defence Policy Guidelines. Tak-ing the National Security Strategy as a basis, the fi rst part of the Guidelines draws conclusions for defence policy. The second part uses these conclu-sions to expound the core task of the Bundeswehr and set the course for the overall military defence concept, for the Bundeswehr Capability Profi le and, for the fi rst time, for a Military Strategy.
Based on these Defence Policy Guidelines, we will make fundamental changes in order to create the Bundeswehr of the future. This will affect everything from our structures and our armaments and procurement procedures to our common identity. This way, we are now creating the basis for a Bundeswehr that is operational, warfi ghting-capable and fi t for the future: a Bundeswehr for the Zeitenwende. “We must redefi ne national defence and collective defence. In the long term, we must redefi ne the role and the tasks of the Bundeswehr in a multipolar world.
In short, the Zeitenwende must be followed by yet another change, a change of mindset. All structures and all processes must serve the overarching objective of robustness and, when it comes to the armed forces, of warfi ghting capabi-lity. In this process, we must achieve a high degree of fl exibility and agility for the Bundeswehr of the future.” “Zeitenwende on tour” speech by the Chief of Defence at the Cyber Innovation Hub of the Bundeswehr on 13 July 2023 in Berlin

8 I. Defining Germany’s Position in Terms of Defence Policy

9 In its National Security Strategy, the Federal Gov-emment determined the strategic course for Ger-man security and defence policy.
The Russian Federation’s invasion of Ukraine in ­violation of intemational law brought war back to Europe. It also amounts to an attack on the ­European security architecture and the intema-tional rules-based order, which represents a tum-ing point – or Zeitenwende – and has implications far beyond the European continent. Without a fundamental intemal change, the Russian Feder-ation will remain the greatest threat to peace and security in the Euro-Atlantic area for the foresee-able future.
A life of peace and freedom can no longer be tak-en for granted in central Europe. We must be able to defend our freedom and security together with our allies. Our willingness to take on responsibili-ty and our will to make impact are at the heart of our strong commitment to the European securi-ty architecture and the intemational rules-based order – a commitment that may include military ­action. The Bundeswehr is a core instrument of our security policy.
Our security environment requires the Bundes­ wehr to consistently focus on national and col-lective defence in a holistic context. The Bundes­ wehr’s contribution to total defence is a pre­requisite for the ability of the Federal Govemment to take action and thus for the comprehensive protec-tion of the German population in crises, war and against hybrid threats. Its deterrence and war-fighting capability as well as operational effec-tiveness are the basic requirements for a future-­ oriented, fully equipped Bundeswehr that is ready to deploy and fight on a sustainable basis at any time. Modem national and collective defence thus determines the structure of the Bundes­ wehr.
Our robustness depends on the warfighting capability of the Bundeswehr

Our common goal is to continue to live in peace, freedom and security in this country.
For this, we need robustness and resilience.
Our robustness calls for a whole-of-govem­ ment and a whole-of-society-approach, be-cause threats must be countered with all instruments of our integrated approach to security. The Bundeswehr is a core instru-ment of our robustness against military threats. As such, it must be warfighting-ca-pable in all areas. This means that Bundes-wehr personnel and equipment are geared toward fulfilling its demanding tasks. The benchmark for this is the Bundeswehr’s readiness to fight at any time and to achieve success in high-intensity combat. This is the only way that deterrence can be credible and peace guaranteed. Germany’s security remains inextricably linked to that of our Eu-ropean partners and transatlantic Allies.
The security of our Allies is the security of Germa-ny. The Zeitenwende has fundamentally changed the role of Germany and the Bundeswehr in NATO.
During the Cold War, particularly Germany as a front-line state benefited for decades from the presence of NATO Allies on its territory. That is why we are now all the more committed to making significant con-tributions to the protection and security of our Al-lies. This also includes a new type of permanent presence at NATO’s extemal border. The permanent deployment of a brigade in Lithuania is without prec-edent in the history of the Bundeswehr and an im-portant sign of the joint strength of the Alliance. In future, forward presence will become the norm for Bundeswehr. This new role is a tangible expression of the strategic reorientation of the Bundeswehr.

10 The accession of Finland and Sweden will strength-en the Alliance in terms of its deterrence and de-fence potential and its European pillar. Germany is an economic powerhouse at the heart of Europe and as such it is the backbone of collective defence in Europe. As a result of this, however, Germany also faces particular threats, including military ones.
Only with a strong and fully operational Bundes-wehr we convincingly prove our willingness and ability to step up our commitment to our own se-curity and that of our allies and to defend both by military means if necessary. At the same time, it is important to be realistic. In past decades, opera-tions in support of intemational conflict manage-ment came to define the structure of the Bundes-wehr while national and collective defence faded into the background. These developments cannot be reversed in just a few years. Should it become necessary, however, the Bundeswehr will contrib-ute to national and collective defence with all avail-able means even today.
The German people and our allies rightly expect our armed forces to be fully operational. To get there, the Bundeswehr will have to undergo a long-term adap-tation process that we have already resolutely begun.
The Bundeswehr has a lot of catching up to do and is faced with familiar financial constraints and demographic changes. Against this backdrop, the Zeitenwende requires that ambitious goals be reconciled with credible, realistic plans. Ger-man security policy and thus the Bundeswehr will be faced with the difficult but necessary task of ­prioritisation in the foreseeable future. We ­cannot procrastinate if we want to achieve the goal of an operationally ready Bundeswehr. Time is of the ­essence.
Operational readiness requires resources. The Bun-deswehr continues to depend on dedicated, productive and creative personnel. The diverse mem-bers of the Bundeswehr, military personnel, civil servants and civilian employees, are the key to its success. They are entitled to modem equipment and fully equipped units. We are not just filling structural gaps, however, but must make the Bun-deswehr as a whole fit for the future. We will speed up procurement to achieve this goal, opting for commercially available solutions where possible and developing our own where necessary. Deal-ing with the Zeitenwende will require a sustainable commitment of at least 2% of Germany’s GDP, to be invested in defence, specifically in the opera-tional readiness of the Bundeswehr. This is the only way for us to meet NATO Capability Targets and contribute our fair share to the protection of the Alliance. With this approach, we can realistically and credibly ensure reliable deterrence and defence capabilities, meet our Alliance obligations and con-tribute to intemational crisis management.
While our focus is on ensuring security against the Russian Federation, Germany faces a multitude of other simultaneous and mutually exacerbating se-curity challenges. Crises, conflicts and regional ten-sions are affecting our immediate security environ-ment in Africa, the Middle East, the Arctic and the Indo-Pacific region. China is at once partner, com-petitor and systemic rival. It is trying to reshape the rules-based intemational order as it sees fit. In do-ing so, China is increasingly aggressive in its pursuit of regional supremacy and repeatedly acts in ways that run counter to our values and interests.
For Germany as a trading nation with global eco-nomic ties, destabilisation in other regions of the world and threats to the security of sea lines of communication directly affect our security and prosperity. The worldwide proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and delivery systems as well as the increasing uncontrolled proliferation of small arms and light weapons and ammunition also have the potential to jeopardise European and intema-tional security.

11 The foreseeable consequences of climate change and developments in the cyber and information do-main as well as in space are of strategic relevance.
This is also true of rapid technological develop-ments, particularly in the fields of quantum tech-nology, robotics, nanotechnology and semiconduc-tor technology as well as the increasing spread of methods and applications of artificial intelligence.
Especially the global arms control architecture will need fresh impetus to deal with these issues.

I.
II. Strategic Priorities in Defence Policy

13 II.1. Strengthening our Defence Capabilities ­and our Committment to the Alliance ­ In order to resolutely respond, at national level and collectively, to the persistent and extensive threat posed by the Russian Federation, it is vital that we further strengthen NATO as a guarantor of de-terrence and defence and reinforce the European Union’s ability to act in the context of its Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP). This is an ex-pression of sustainable transatlantic burden-shar-ing.
We play a collaborative and constructive role in our alliances. In this regard, the closely coordinated and mutually complementary cooperation between NATO and the EU points the way to the future. The transatlantic Alliance is more politically united than ever and much strengthened in its deterrence and defence capabilities. The EU provides complemen-tary contributions mainly through economic, hu-manitarian and financial measures and by providing capacity building for partners. Thanks to the wide range of tools at its disposal, it is an important se-curity player. For example, the EU has reiterated its willingness to visibly strengthen its ability to act in its immediate security environment. We provide an important contribution to achieving the objectives of the EU’s Common Security and Defence Policy.
The capability to defend Germany and its allies requires comprehensive military preparation in peacetime and serves as a deterrent. The associat-ed build-up of a combat brigade in Lithuania is the beacon project of the Zeitenwende. With the 3+3 coordination format of the three framework na-tions and the three host nations for the Allied mil-itary presence in the Baltic States, it underlines our ambition to play a substantial role in the Alliance by integrating seamlessly with NATO defence plan-ning. National and collective defence continues to require participation in credible nuclear deterrence.
The capability for effective defence is not based on a mission-and combat-ready Bundeswehr alone.
Total defence is the result of military defence and civilian preparedness for war. This is the only way to ensure Germany’s capacity as a central hub within Europe for our allies and partners.
The expansion of robust and secure defence indus-try capacities is an important element of the rapid, comprehensive and sustainable supply of the Bun-deswehr in times of crisis and war. Improved condi-tions for a strong security and defence industry are the foundation for this.
Expanding total defence and overall national resilience with Bundeswehr contributions comple-ments govemment protection tasks in the civilian sector with the aim of countering attacks on our sovereignty and territorial integrity. Successful to-tal defence requires the close coordination and cooperation of all relevant stakeholders – state, society and industry – even in peacetime. Their cooperation must be based on a common understanding of the importance of our robustness. Our common objective must be to maximise, in particu-lar, resilience and adaptability in a whole-of-society-­ approach.
In detail, this means:
• strengthening the Bundeswehr’s defence capa-bility in such a way that it can serve as a perma-nent and reliable pillar of conventional defence in Europe,
• swiftly meeting NATO Capability Targets,
• consistently strengthening the Bundeswehr as a military supporting partner in Europe,
• providing our contribution to deterrence and, if necessary, to defence at NATO’s extemal border,

14
• pushing ahead with the Common European Secu-rity and Defence Policy (CSDP) and the strength-ening of the European pillar in NATO,
• ensuring, as a whole-of-govemment task, the preparation, relocation and deployment of own and allied forces in and through Germany,
• enhancing the resilience and the protection of ­defence-related and critical infrastructure,
• adapting the applicability of emergency con-trol and emergency preparedness legislation for modem national and collective defence,
• contributing to the national situation picture and expanding the cross govemment integrated network in the cyber and information domain as well as in outer space.
II.2. Supporting Stability in Europe’s Neighbourhood To respond to complex and dynamic developments in our security environment in accordance with the 360-degree approach of NATO’s Strategic Concept and the EU’s Strategic Compass, our intemational commitment must go beyond our defence capa-bility and Alliance obligations. Germany’s approach to cooperation with states in the European neigh-bourhood is collaborative and based on require-ments. The guiding principle is the assumption of regional responsibility by our partners.
Bundeswehr contributions to intemational crisis management remain an indispensable element in support of the goal of promoting and supporting stability in the European neighbourhood. As part of Germany’s overall civil-military commitment to conflict management, post-crisis rehabilitation and peacebuilding, we are focusing on enabling and in-creasing resilience in our partner countries in close coordination with regional pillars of stability.
Our defence commitments in the eastem Mediter-ranean, in the Middle East and on the African conti-nent are primarily aimed at combating transnation-al terrorism and the causes and consequences of state fragility, as well as at promoting regional sta-bility and the peaceful coexistence of people. Isra-el’s right to exist is of particular importance in this context. Israel’s security is a fundamental principle of German govemance.
In detail, this means:
• contributing to the overall commitment of the Federal Govemment abroad, including Bundes-wehr operations for conflict management and post-crisis rehabilitation,
• strengthening the resilience and long-term se-curity of our partners against destabilising influ-ences and military aggression,
• using military training assistance, equipment aid and the military component of the Enable and Enhance Initiative of the Federal Govemment as well as armaments cooperation to contribute to the build-up and expansion of capabilities,
• continuing our involvement in the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) as a regional platform for dialogue and cooperation and as a comerstone of cooperative security in Europe.
II.3. Contributing to Maintaining the Rules-Based Intemational Order In a multipolar world, we must strengthen our fo-cus on additional regions and challenges in which, or due to which, the intemational order is being challenged. The objective is to identify and assess developments and their effects at an early stage, to identify our options for action, and to expand them with strategic foresight in coordination or cooper-ation with our partners. Our commitment to this

15 requires a comprehensive and intemationally ori-ented defence policy that is supported by inclusion and multinational integration on an equal footing.
In this respect, the German constitution (Basic Law) and our security interests derived from it form the basis for our active commitment to the rules-based intemational order. The United Nations (UN) are a comerstone of this order.
Our interest in maintaining the rules-based intemational order should be firmly defended, especial-ly in view of an intemational environment that is increasingly characterised by volatility and multipolarity. This should also point the way for Germa-ny’s defence policy. We therefore seek to cooperate with states that have a sincere interest in maintain-ing and strengthening the intemational order, even if they do not share all our values. To take account of their concems and security interests, we are strengthening strategic partnerships and opening up new forms of cooperation.
In detail, this means:
• actively participating in the United Nations as a proven key element of German security poli-cy and, with a clear focus, participating in Unit-ed Nations peacekeeping activities and missions and helping to strengthen its instruments,
• intensifying worldwide defence cooperation with proven partners, especially in the Indo-Pacific, mainly through defence diplomacy, regular mil-itary presence, reliable armaments cooperation and capability building,
• continuing our advocacy for compliance with ex-isting arms control and non-proliferation regimes.
The above priorities are implemented through our integrated defence policy, which is based on a whole-of-govemment and multinational approach and geostrategic orientation. The purpose of this integrated defence policy always remains the same: to defend Germany and its allies. National and col-lective defence is therefore the core task of the Bundeswehr.

I.
III. Core Task and Additional Tasks of the Bundeswehr

17 The core task and additional tasks of the Bundes-wehr are derived from the constitutional mandate and the strategic priorities of the integrated de-fence policy. The core task is to provide modem national and collective defence; all other tasks and missions are subordinate to this. Intemation-al law and the German constitution are the foun-dations of all actions taken by the Bundeswehr.
All Bundeswehr tasks are carried out by military and civil-military forces that are robust and sus-tainable.
III.1. The Bundeswehr’s Core Task: ­National and Collective Defence The Bundeswehr is the guarantor of Germany’s deterrence and defence capability. Its core task is national defence, which protects its citizens as well as the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Germany and its allies through firm and reliable integration in collective defence. This requires that military and civilian defence must be com-bined as total defence.
Through nuclear sharing, Germany furthermore continues to make its contribution to nuclear de-terrence in the Alliance. On German territory, ef-fective national territorial defence and the military contribution to Germany’s function as a central hub are the key services provided by the Bundes-wehr.
Under the umbrella of effective total defence, the Bundeswehr moreover contributes to the resil-ience of state and society. The Bundeswehr itself is resilient if it can increase its robustness, atten-uate the effects of attacks and rapidly adapt to changing situations. This means that it build up reserves, organize procedures and processes to be agile and flexible, and strengthen individual responsibility.
Core Task: National and Collective ­Defence

• Measures to deter potential adversaries both on German territory and on Alliance territory in all domains
• Defence tasks on German territory, includ-ing national territorial defence
• Defending against attacks on the territory of Allies
• Defending against terrorism and hybrid threats
• Consolidating the transatlantic and Euro-pean defence capability III.2. Task: Promoting Stability and Buil-ding up Resilient Partners as a Contributi-on to Intemational Crisis Management The Bundeswehr contributes to the prevention and management of intemational crises and to post-crisis rehabilitation. Preventive action has priority in this respect. The Bundeswehr thereby contributes to regional security and stability, es-pecially in the European neighbourhood. Contri-butions to intemational crisis management must as a rule be established and implemented on an cross govemment and multilateral basis within the framework of intemational organisations, alli-ances and partnerships. Our military commitment is primarily carried out under the umbrella of the United Nations as well as NATO and the EU. The spectrum of our contributions ranges from the dispatch of individuals to the deployment of mil-itary advisory groups, mobile training teams and broadly enabled contingents.

18
Task:
Stabilising and Building up Resilient ­Partners as a Contribution to Intemational Crisis Management

• Active military and civil-military contri-butions within the framework of intema-tional organisations, alliances and part-nerships for conflict prevention, crisis management, post-crisis rehabilitation and stabilisation, including national early waming processes
• Contributions to UN peace missions
• Contributions to enabling and capacity-­ building initiatives for partners
• Contributions to the fight against transna-tional terrorism, against threats from the cyber and information domain, and against novel hybrid threats
• Contributions to the protection of sea lines of communication
• Contributions to the enforcement of em-bargos and sanctions III.3. Task: Defence Diplomacy, Intema-tional Cooperation and Partnership With its broad range of defence diplomacy instru-ments, the Bundeswehr contributes to strengthen-ing the rules-based intemational order, including its arms control regime. Beyond this, we are using our instruments specifically to enhance and enable the security structures of partners and regional or-ganisations. It remains important to actively build, maintain and further deepen the relations with our allies and partners. Our commitment is geared to bilateral and multilateral priorities in regional focus areas. This is because established and reliable bilat-eral and multilateral relations are the basis of our ability to act - and respond around the world.
Task:
Defence Diplomacy as an Instrument of­ ­Intemational Cooperation and Partnership
• Strengthening security structures of part-ners and regional organisations
• Establishing and continually cultivating ­bilateral security and military relations
• Arms-control, confidence-building, and ­security-building measures III.4. Task: Homeland Security and Sup-port Functions The protection of our citizens is a major priority in the mission accomplishment of the Bundeswehr.
Accordingly, forces are kept available at all times to ensure crisis management and homeland secu-rity as part of national contributions to the Federal Govemment’s rescue, recovery and evacuation op-erations.
The Bundeswehr also makes further contributions to the resilience of state and society which comple-ment its core task. This particularly includes subsidiary support, standing operational missions and cooperation within the scope of cross govemment agreements.

19
Task:
Homeland Security and Support Functions
• Performing of national territorial tasks in situations other than states of tension and defence (homeland security)
• Monitoring and securing German airspace and territorial waters
• Surveillance of critical space infrastructure
• Permanent subsidiary assumption of tasks within the scope of cross govemment agreements
• Providing assistance in the event of natu-ral disasters, serious accidents, or domestic emergencies, as well as administrative as-sistance
• Contributing to counterterrorism opera-tions within the limits of the constitution
• Rescuing and evacuating persons isolated abroad
• Contributing to evacuations from critical situations
• Contributing to hostage rescue missions abroad Additional Permanent Missions

• Handling defence aspects of national cyber security, contributing to the national situ-ation picture in space and in the cyber and information domain as part of a national and multinational approach to security, as well as ensuring cyber security in Bundes-wehr networks
• Helping retain and further develop of na-tional key technologies as well as promot-ing cooperative, especially European and transatlantic Bundes approaches to the research, development and use of capabili-ties
• Performing all measures to maintain the operation of the Bundeswehr in ­Germany, including agency tasks, qualification, ini-tial, advanced and follow-­on training, training and exercise support, and military security and order

I.
IV. Requirements for the Overall Military Defence Concept

21 Our strategic priorities of the integrated defence policy serve to determine the tasks, deployment and further development of the Bundeswehr. Our resources will always be limited. We will therefore need to cover the entire spectrum of tasks and mis-sions with a single set of forces.
The Defence Policy Guidelines define the require-ments for the overall military defence concept.
They thereby set the conceptual framework for the military contribution to total defence. They are connected to the Civil Defence Concept published by the Federal Ministry of the Interior and Com-munity and to further documents of the ministries relevant to Germany’s security architecture. The relevant contributions of the Bundeswehr in this area are also determined by the requirements of the Defence Policy Guidelines.
What all tasks have in common is that the demands placed on the Bundeswehr will change depending on threats to our security. This means that the mil-itary-strategic and strategic-conceptual develop-ment of the Bundeswehr are closely interlinked. It follows that these two pillars form the overall mil-itary defence concept. By developing both pillars in a flexible and agile way, we can strengthen our long-term strategic capability for the future devel-opment of the Bundeswehr. In this respect, mili-tary strategy prioritises the force layout. The stra-tegic-conceptual dimension sets the National Level of Ambition for the Bundeswehr of the future.
IV.1. Requirements for Military-Strategic Implementation The military-strategic requirements define success factors and formulate conditions that are decisive for the degree to which the core task and other tasks are accomplished.
In detail, this concems the following requirements:
Accomplishing all tasks with a single set of forces The capabilities of the Bundeswehr are delivered by a single set of forces. This single set of forces must enable maximum flexibility and agility and the deployment of the Bundeswehr in different regions and across the entire threat spectrum. For-ward-looking altemative and contingency plan-ning is required to enable faster, more effective and better coordinated crisis responses together with our partners. We can further increase effec-tiveness by integrating multinational partners and whole-of-govemment capabilities. In addition, we must be able to utilise high-tech innovations more rapidly. To this end, the Bundeswehr must be en-abled to rapidly adopt innovations and make them widely available.
Thinking and acting in different geostrategic areas The challenges of the strategic environment call for a 360-degree perspective. Our integrated defence policy requires thinking and acting in a geostrategic context as well. This is the foundation on to which our military strategy is based. Depending on the threat and objective, we will take different quali-tative and quantitative approaches to the Bunde-swehr’s engagement in different geostrategic areas which range from deterrence and defence to de-fence diplomacy.
In this context, the Euro-Atlantic area is the clear focus of our defence efforts and our commitment of forces, due to the direct threat to the sover-eignty and territorial integrity of Germany and its allies.
Developments in the regions of Europe and its neighbourhood, especially North and West Af-rica, the Sahel region and the Middle East, may pose risks and threats to the security of Germany and Europe and are therefore of military-strategic ­importance.

22 When it comes to maintaining and strengthening the rules-based intemational order, the Indo-Pacif-ic region is increasing in importance.
In addition, the nature of the threat environment makes it necessary to operate beyond geographi-cally defined areas, namely in the cyber and infor-mation domain, and in space.
Interconnecting the geostrategic areas and the domains of land, air, sea, space, cyber and infor­ mation, and generating strategic effects The military-strategic environment is characterised by interactions between geostrategic areas. Risks, threats and the actions of players are not limited to one area or one domain only. In terms of military strategy, they must be interconnected with each other in a targeted way.
Strategic effects must be defined, generated and synchronised to achieve effects in geostrategic ar-eas. The permanent deployment of a German bri-gade in Lithuania, for instance, is intended to have an effect that contributes to credible deterrence against an attack on NATO territory. At the same time, joint exercises with partners in the Indo-Pa-cific region can have an effect on the partners in-volved and also contribute to strengthening the rules-based intemational order. Strategic effects must be directed in a comprehensive manner. This is the only way to ensure that the limited resources of the “single set of forces” are used in a targeted way.
Central fields of action in this respect are visible military activities and the associated strategic com-munication, as well as synchronisation with mea-sures taken by our allies and partners. The corre-sponding national measures must be controlled from a single source. To this end, we must be able to deploy the Bundeswehr’s forces in a scalable and cross-domain manner. The basis of mission ac-complishment in this context is a resilient and un-interrupted command and control capability, both within NATO and at the national level. Defence planning, operations planning and force planning must be consistently aligned.
Conclusions derived from this approach must be specified and considered in detail in a military strat-egy. They include: for national and collective defence
• harmonising national defence planning with the corresponding planning in the Alliance;
• under national responsibility, ensuring defence against hybrid and terrorist threats, and protec-tion of forces and facilities of the Bundeswehr and allied forces as well as of defence-related critical infrastructure;
• ensuring the timely deployment and supply of robust and sustainable forces in line with NATO defence plans;
• having an established and responsive system that enables timely political and military-polit-ical decision-making as well as an alerting and build-up capability of the Bundeswehr; for the promotion of intemational stability
• maintaining the capability for intemational crisis management operations on a multilateral basis and aligning it in a flexible, scalable and mis-sion-oriented way;
• translating political guidelines into clear military objectives and formulating them with their im-plications in mind, with regular review intervals; for defence diplomacy, intemational cooperation and partnerships
• strengthening the rules-based intemational or-der through an effective contribution on a multilateral basis;

23
• maintaining flexibility in order to integrate our military contributions into a complex and frag-mented security architecture;
• participating in exercises with the aim of devel-oping partnerships and enhancing and enabling selected partners;
IV.2. Requirements for Strategic and Con-ceptual Implementation The strategic and conceptual requirements are the primary framework for the further development of the Bundeswehr and for the National Level of Am-bition, which is defined in the Bundeswehr Capabil-ity Profile.
Requirements for the Bundeswehr Capability Profile Credible deterrence and national defence are em-bedded in the framework of the Alliance. The stra-tegic requirements and results of the NATO De-fence Planning Process (NDPP), including the Alliance’s overall set of capabilities as derived from them, are therefore of fundamental importance for the Bundeswehr Capability Profile. National ca-pability development must also take into account national political, legal and military strategy requirements. The EU’s coherent capability priorities complete this framework.
The Bundeswehr Capability Profile specifies capa-bility requirements derived from the overall pic-ture of the core task, additional tasks, and strategic, conceptual and military strategy requirements.
The Capability Profile defines the objectives of the Bundeswehr and is a binding framework for medi-um-term and long-term capability development. In future, we will increasingly incorporate national po-sitions derived from it into shaping the NATO De-fence Planning Process.
In this context, it is clear that it will take at least
2 % of the GDP to be able to provide the neces-sary capabilities for a defence-capable Bundes-wehr that can honour its obligations within the Alliance.
The National Level of Ambition in the Bundeswehr Capability Profile describes a graduated, balanced set of capabilities for honouring obligations within the Alliance with a single set of forces.
In order to make targeted use of scarce resources,
it includes:
• specific requirements for the detailed planning of necessary capabilities in terms of quality and quantity,
• centralised definition of resources in all planning categories (personnel, organisation, infrastruc-ture, operation, armaments), and
• basic parameters for capability development pri-orities, Scientific findings, innovation potential, and na-tional and intemational strategic foresight are key factors for medium to long-term orientation.
National Level of Ambition The core task of national and collective defence guides the Bundeswehr in all planning categories. It is also the defining feature of its identity, structure, functionality, multinational cooperation, training and exercises.
In order for the Bundeswehr to accomplish its task of national and collective defence, the personnel build-up capability must be ensured by reserves.
Another key factor for success is the definition and allocation of the task of reinforcing national and collective defence, which supplements the peace-24 time tasks of active duty personnel employed in agencies and structures that would be temporar-ily reduced in the event of national and collective defence. These plans must be given priority. In the event of national defence, all available forces are to be employed.
The accomplishment of our mission largely de-pends on meeting the relevant personnel require-ments. Strategic and conceptual guidelines spec-ifying a personnel ceiling for military personnel as well as the budgetary target strenth for civilian personnel reflect the desired future total person-nel strength and as such they are binding require-ments for defence planning.
The reserve reinforces active duty personnel across the entire task spectrum to ensure immediate per-sonnel build-up, operational readiness and sustain-ability. In future, all possible measures must there-fore be taken to further increase the assignment of personnel to the reserve. In addition to its funda-mental contribution to mission accomplishment, the reserve also promotes the Bundeswehr’s inte-gration into society.
The core task of national and collective defence can only be accomplished through a whole-of-so-ciety approach and within the scope of total de-fence. Civil defence has to provide essential sup-port services to total defence, especially in the areas of infrastructure, logistics, health care, protection and security. From the Federal Ministry of Defence’s perspective, this support must be de-fined as a matter of priority.
Cooperation with civil defence stakeholders is in-creasingly important. Accordingly, we must further expand our potential for cooperation at this funda-mental interface. Civil-military cooperation in the areas of homeland security and national territorial defence is key in this regard.
The overarching objective of civil defence is provide supplies and support to the civilian population as well as to our own armed forces and allied armed forces in order to ensure their operational capability and freedom of manoeuvre sustainably and without restrictions, in situations where they are needed.
In order to give Germany the necessary abilities to fulfil its task as a hub, which can only be achieved through a whole-of-society approach, capability development should also focus on military aspects.
Building on the Bundeswehr’s own capabilities, op-tions for contracting reliable civilian commercial services are also to be further developed.
Thanks to civil-military interfaces, standing opera-tional tasks such as airspace security, cyber and in-formation space security and the use of space are being implemented across various ministries and even at cross govemment level. Plans must be in place for transferring them to military control in the event of crisis or war.
Cooperation between military and civilian agencies that are responsible for defence tasks or will have to handle them in the future must be enhanced both at the national level and within the Alliance.
This particularly applies to common procedures and situation pictures in order to be able to act and respond quickly across the entire spectrum.
Within the scope of collective defence, interoper-ability and integration in a multinational context are of crucial importance. For this reason, we must actively contribute to the conceptual further devel-opment of NATO towards the capability to conduct multi-domain operations.
In a cross-domain approach, all elements of the Bundeswehr must achieve military effects in a syn-chronised manner, even outside of their own posi-tion in the organisational structure. The ability to
fight and to provide combat support are still the

25 main features of, and benchmarks for, the success-ful employment of the Bundeswehr. In view of rapid developments in the high-tech sector and owing to the dynamic security environment, the development and introduction of future-oriented capabilities such as standoff reconnaissance as-sets and precision weapons are to be systematically promoted.
Germany’s role as a supporting partner for allies is to be further developed. In this context, the assumption of leadership responsibility must be backed by capabilities that are compatible with those of allies. The flexibility and synergistic inte-gration of these contributions must continue to be ensured.

I.
V. Fundamental Principles for an ­Effective Bundes-wehr of the Future

27 The Bundeswehr must have the personnel and material it requires to conduct sustainable opera-tions at any time. The changed nature of the threat to our security and the brutal reality of the war in Ukraine make it clear that we have to base our struc-tures and processes on a combat scenario involving an adversary that is at least our equal: Winning this conflict is not just our intention – it is an imperative.
This guides all our actions. It is also clear that the Bundeswehr must be prepared for operations with a different requirements profile at any time.
These challenges in the Zeitenwende call for a long-term process of adapting the Bundeswehr, which we have already resolutely begun. It is clear, however, that there can be no simple, hasty solutions to deficits from the past, especially decades of underfunding, nor to future demographic developments. At all events, sus-tainable provision of the necessary resources is a fun-damental prerequisite for these efforts.
V.1. A Common Concept of Robustness Our organisational and leadership culture is built on the foundation of our free and democratic con-stitutional order. This commitment to values is the basis for the common identity and concept of tradi-tion that all members of the Bundeswehr share.
With the Zeitenwende and the violation of the rules-based intemational order that gave rise to it, expectations regarding the robustness of our de-mocracy have also increased in German society. For the Bundeswehr, this means that the armed forces are able and willing to bravely and successfully de-fend the rights and freedom of the German people with the utmost resolve. The defence administra-tion is equally committed to this objective.
In addition to all other efforts, successful and cred-ible national and collective defence requires a com-mon concept of robustness. It is an essential guide-line for our thinking and actions. This concept must permeate and guide our daily service at all levels.
Robustness describes an attitude towards the de-fence readiness of the entire Bundeswehr and has lasting resonance in all defence-relevant areas and in German society. The Bundeswehr, including the reserve, belongs at the centre of society, which is where it must make its presence felt. The Bundes-wehr will therefore continue to foster ongoing in-teractions and discourse with society and promote awareness that robustness for Germany’s protec-tion is a whole-of-society task. We are committed to maintaining an active veterans’ culture and an active culture of remembrance for those killed in action, which are supported by the general public.
Against this backdrop, the common concept of ro-bustness includes the following elements:
• Warfighting capability as a guiding principle for action
• Military personnel who are willing to bravely defend the rights and freedom of the German people and knowingly accept danger to life and limb in order to do so.

• A responsible defence administration that is guided by the principle of supporting the armed forces for high-intensity combat.
• Trust as a basis
• The trust of personnel in their own abilities is the basis for actively taking on responsibility and for courageously and resolutely commit-ting to their task.

• Trust in leadership, politics and society to make the right decisions and to provide the necessary support.

• Trust bom from a robust error culture that systematically promotes courage and the will-ingness to take risks as well as organisational leaming from mistakes.

28
• Leadership as a means of making a difference

• With the concept of leadership develop-ment and civic education, the Bundeswehr has an organisational and leadership culture that strives to foster the ability to make val-ue-based decisions. This concept is predicated on personal development and the acquisition of political, historical, ethical and intercultural knowledge and skills.

• Leadership styles are chosen wisely and ap-propriately. We practise mission command, clearly oriented towards the objectives to be achieved. In this way, we provide the neces-sary scope for action through foresight and trust. This requires clear targets and frame-works that guide, but do not restrict.

• Pooling and carrying out tasks and respon-sibilities at lowest possible level are prereq-uisites for sound advice and informed deci-sion-making. This is the only way to give our troops the ability to act and the latitude they need in the field.

• A results-oriented and mission-oriented ap-proach guides our actions. The structures and procedures in place support all steps towards achieving our objectives. They are not an end in themselves.
All members of the Bundeswehr have the same objec-tive: a Bundeswehr that is ready to deploy and fight.
Our common concept of robustness guides us in this regard. Accordingly, we will incorporate it as a key el-ement of modemised leadership development and civic education, and develop it further. To this end, a Bundeswehr-wide concept must be developed, which reconciles the special features of military task accomplishment with a civilian support mission for the armed forces. Differences in status should be geared towards the common task of an operational Bundes-wehr.
This common concept of robustness stems from the will and the personal readiness of all members of the Bundeswehr and its reserve, and is promoted by the example set by superiors at all levels.
V.2. Personnel The personnel strength of the Bundeswehr and the professional qualifications required of its members are primarily based on the requirements dictated by Germany’s defence capability and Alliance obliga-tions as well as on the National Level of Ambition derived from them.
This calls for systematic intemal optimisation and for the exploitation of the full personnel potential of the Bundeswehr. This is complemented by inten-sified and more flexible recruitment emphasising the attractiveness and voluntary nature of service.
Reaching the personnel target will be one of the central challenges facing the Bundeswehr in the foreseeable future.
We are launching a number of measures to achieve this objective. Based on Bundeswehr-wide cooperation, our goal is to open up a wide range of career options, reduce systemic overcomplexity, strengthen local decision-making and account-ability through deregulation and regionalisation, and flexibly and quickly generate potential for the Bundeswehr, thereby ensuring personnel readiness through a range of measures while taking into ac-count and accepting the realities of society. Person-nel management is a collective task.
What is important now is to quickly implement concrete measures aimed at increasing personnel numbers so that we can make progress together.
We need a future-proof body of active military and civilian personnel and a well-trained reserve. Per-sonnel management and the major military organ-isational elements must lay the foundations for

29 achieving the qualitative and quantitative require-ments for personnel.
Qualifications and training are key factors in recruitment and retention. Professional and realistic training and exercises contribute significantly to operational readiness and mission accomplishment.
They also facilitate recruitment. Investments in ed-ucation and training create incentives and have a multiplier effect on recruitment.
Equal opportunities, diversity and inclusion are in-tegral elements of the Bundeswehr. As society di-versifies, they are becoming increasingly important for recruitment, but also for the Bundeswehr’s inte-gration in society.
The requirements of national and collective de-fence and of Bundeswehr operations abroad pres-ent major challenges for the compatibility of family and military service. Welfare measures designed to reduce the impact on service members with family responsibilities have direct implications for our de-fence capability.
V.3. Organisation The significantly increased demands on Germany’s defence capability and ability to honour its Alliance obligations necessitate the adaption and further development of the Federal Ministry of Defence and the Bundeswehr. Our common concept of ro-bustness must also be reflected in the structure of the organisation: This structure must be coher-ent and must strengthen initiative, as well as deci-sion-making competence and responsibility, at all levels.
The organisation must become much more agile in order to respond to security challenges in any sit-uation. A framework for better, bolder and faster decisions must be created. This requires structures that are both agile and resilient, with a fast aug-mentation capability. We cannot afford to have a sluggish working culture and rigidly formal work processes. To this end, we must reduce redundan-cies, eliminate unclear interfaces and develop more streamlined overall structures. Instead of respon-sibilities that are artificially divided up or unclear, we need more willingness to take on responsibility, less risk-averse thinking and less of a focus on rig-idly defined areas of responsibility. Instead of more posts, we need a more agile body of personnel. In-stead of unclear, overburdened structures, we need more organisational clarity and interfaces that promote rather than prevent working relationships.
Decisions should and must be taken at the level where they belong.
To this end, operational command and control processes and procedures must be further developed at the national level with the aim of enhancing na-tional and multinational interoperability and promoting integration with allies and partners.
The Federal Defence Administration in particular must be given the necessary structural capacities to ensure sustainable accomplishment of our core task. Steps taken in this respect must be guided by the additional tasks that arise from the application of emergency preparedness and emergency control legislation.
The augmentation capability that is required in the event of national defence must be prepared by es-tablishing the necessary recruiting structures, tak-ing into account nonactive personnel and materiel resources. In line with the core task, combat and support units of the armed forces must be adapted as necessary, the Federal Defence Administration must be oriented towards providing support, and other responsibilities must be decentralised.
Organisational and structural decisions must be reviewed in terms of their ability to accommodate de-mographic changes. The focus of all initiatives and

30 measures must be on further enhancing the opera-tional capability of the Bundeswehr as a whole.
We will continue with the recently started review of intemal regulations and national legal require-ments that stand in the way of necessary improve-ments in effectiveness and efficiency. Here, too, the objective is the focus on mission accomplishment and provide the best support possible for this pur-pose.
V.4. Infrastructure The timely provision of infrastructure is crucial to the defence readiness of the Federal Republic of Germany. This applies to facilities needed for new weapon systems as well as to accommodation, storage, repair, data centres and training. The infra-structure of the Bundeswehr must be modemised and expanded at an accelerated pace.
In order to achieve this, the requirements necessary for the operational readiness of the Bundeswehr and for its ability to ensure national and collective defence will be prioritised in line with the core task, in a transparent procedure in consultation with users, and harmonised with current procurement projects. In order to meet the challenges of the Zeitenwende and fulfil requirements on schedule, an accelerated infrastructure process will be estab-lished with a broader spectrum of implementation options. Standardised solutions will increasingly be used to satisfy recurring requirements.
An important basis for this accelerated process is provided by the new Guidelines for the Implemen-tation of Federal Construction Projects (RBBau).
These Guidelines open up new room for manoeu-vre. We and our partners at the building construc-tion authorities should make the most of this, by being willing to assume responsibility and make de-cisions where they arise.
At the same time, any sections of non-­statutory ­intemal Bundeswehr rules of procedure that govem the implementation of the old RBBau in our remit and conflict with the new RBBau, their ­objectives and the altematives they provide for meeting requirements, will not be applied until further notice. Any margin of discretion must con-sistently be used in the interest of time. Steps that are not absolutely necessary within the process must be left out. Further deregulation options must be identified wherever they arise, reviewed in cooperation with the competent authorities at the federal and federal state levels and then put into practice.
When it comes to tendering procedures, existing exemption clauses for the Bundeswehr must be applied at all times and all procurement law options to speed up the procedure must be used.
This applies even more to projects that are crucial for the Zeitenwende, strengthening national and collective defence and for maintaining capabilities of the armed forces.
V.5. Budget and Finances After decades of cuts to its budget, the Bundes-wehr must be given the equipment it needs to con-duct operations now in the future. Our clear ob-jective is to make the Bundeswehr fit to counter current and future threats as soon as possible.
An essential prerequisite for and yardstick of Ger-man credibility in implementing the Zeitenwende is the full and sustainable funding of a Bundeswehr that has modem equipment and all the personnel and materiel it needs. In terms of long-term plan-ning, the budget development necessary for this must be tailored to the core task and additional tasks of the Bundeswehr and to reliably ensuring our military ability to act. Our benchmark in this context is our defence capability and the ability to honour our Alliance obligations.

31 Long-term secure and therefore reliable and planna-ble funding beyond the scope of the special fund for the Bundeswehr and the annual budget is the prereq-uisite for enabling and further developing the Bun-deswehr in line with its tasks. In order to meet the NATO Capability Targets assigned to Germany, and to develop national capabilities in the long term, a consistently increasing ceiling of at least 2% of the GDP is required in accordance with our political agreements. The special fund for the Bundeswehr is a major step on the way to reaching NATO’s Capa-bility Targets. However, fully meeting these targets will only be possible if the required funds contin-ue to be provided from the federal budget after the special fund has been expended. This means that a significant increase in the defence budget will be necessary to make investments in capability devel-opment possible despite significantly increased op-erating, in-service use and maintenance costs.
This is not just about the funding of the Bundes-wehr, it is about the future of our defence capability and the ability to honour our Alliance obligations. It is about maintaining our robustness and defending our security and freedom. And it is about our credi-bility, both intemally and extemally.
V.6. Sustainability and Climate Change The primary and secondary effects of climate change will have far-reaching implications for the Federal Ministry of Defence and the Bundeswehr.
The Bundeswehr must prepare itself for changes in climatic conditions and the resulting impacts and developments (e.g. scarcity of resources, use of al-temative propulsion systems).
It is our declared aim to fully take the effects of cli-mate change into account in the accomplishment of the core task and additional tasks of the Federal Ministry of Defence and the Bundeswehr in order to further increase the Bundeswehr’s operational readiness in the future.
The resulting need for action and adaptation af-fects almost the entire capability spectrum of the Bundeswehr. From early waming and foresight to training and exercises, from capabilities and inno-vation to new intemational forms of cooperation, there is an enormous transformational potential for the defence sector.
At the same time, an effective defence provides the necessary basis for achieving the sustainabili-ty goals of society as a whole. By pursuing its core task of collective and national defence as a priority, the Bundeswehr makes an essential contribution to these goals. Advancing sustainable development and climate action must therefore not be at odds with the task or the operational readiness of our armed forces.
With the “Strategy on Defence and Climate Change” and the “Sustainability and Climate Protection Strategy”, the Federal Ministry of Defence has laid the foundations in its area of responsibility to enable the Bundeswehr to accomplish its mis-sion sustainably even under conditions of climate change.
V.7. Armaments Policy and Procurement Our primary objective is to ensure that the Bundes-wehr has the equipment it needs in good time, thus making it one of the strongest armed forces in Eu-rope, one that is capable of responding and acting swiftly and sustainably.
Since our primary concem is time, we will consis-tently base procurement for the armed forces on commercially available products. In addition, we will continue to pursue development projects par-ticularly in the field of national key technologies.
At the same time, we must modemise continuously in response to the ever-faster innovation cycles and developments of Industry 4.0.

32 By adapting capabilities in a continuous cycle ac-companied by experimental verification within test structures, and subsequently implementing these capabilities on a broad scale, we will be able to maintain our systems at a state-of-the-art techno-logical level. Using spiral and incremental develop-ment of IT services, platforms will be kept opera-tional over long periods of time and will undergo continuous technical improvement.
Strong national and European defence industries are essential for a Bundeswehr that is fit for the fu-ture. We must significantly strengthen the security and defence industrial base in Germany and Europe in terms of resilience and redundancy.
Intemational armaments cooperation must be in-tensified. NATO and the EU continue to be of vital importance in this respect. Joint armaments projects and the export options they offer enhance Europe’s ability to act and strengthen the European pillar in NATO. We are therefore prepared to increasingly in-tegrate our efforts into European cooperative proj-ects, as long as they serve to equip our armed forces more quickly and generate benefits and synergies.
To this end, we will enhance the European profile in NATO by intensifying cooperation and increasing capacities in the field of armaments and capability cooperation. Numerous measures, for example as part of the Framework Nations Concept or Perma-nent Structured Cooperation, have already generat-ed benefits. We aim to actively participate in Euro-pean initiatives for joint research, development and procurement, and integrate them into the national planning and armaments process.
Beyond that, other strategic partners will play a more significant role in intemational armaments cooperation, for example in the Indo-Pacific region.
We expect multinational procurement cooperation and exports to generate higher production capac-ities, economies of scale, greater interoperability and interchangeability with our allies and partners, as well as the enhancement and preservation of in-dustrial and technological capacities in Germany.
We will continue to assume responsibility in order to live up to our intemational position as an indus-trial centre.
Besides the procurement of weapon systems and equipment, maintenance and sufficient stockpiling are essential for operation. Close cooperation with the defence industry is just as crucial to this as is the further adjustment of emergency preparedness and emergency control legislation.
In order to ensure that required operational stocks are in place, production and storage capacities in the procurement of weapon systems, equipment, food, ammunition and consumables must be ex-panded.
National procurement, its procedures and regu-lations must be systematically tailored to quickly equipping the Bundeswehr. This also means that responsibility should be assumed where it arises.
The chiefs of the services have been given more powers so that they can participate more actively in procurement decision-making processes. This way, the military expertise of the services and major or-ganisational elements will become more closely in-tegrated with planning responsibility.
Achieving all-around operational capability for the Bundeswehr is our overarching objective; establish-ing and maintaining it is the guiding principle of all our procurement activities. The planning process, procurement procedures and regulations affecting them will continue to be adapted according to this principle and will become part of the Zeitenwende.
The intemal transformation of procurement requires resolute and sustainable changes towards a common concept of robustness, which we will

33 jointly create, support, and master. In addition to specialist knowledge and skills, the keys to a mod-em and effective procurement system are the will-ingness to take action and to assume responsibility, resolve, an error culture and a culture of leaming.

34 Imprint Publisher Federal Ministry of Defense (BMVg) Planning I 1
Fontainengraben 150
53123 Bonn Reporting Status
November 2023 Printing House BMVg Kopierstelle IUD III 2 Berlin Design and Typesetting Federal Office of Bundeswehr Infrastructure, Environmental Protection and Services DL I 4, Zentraldruckerei BAIUDBw
Fontainengraben 200
53123 Bonn Translation Bundessprachenamt
50328 Hürth

Photo Credits Bannert / Bundeswehr / P. 11 Behne / Bundeswehr / P. 8 Dorow / Bundeswehr / P. 16, 25 Ink / Bundeswehr / P. 26 Jankowski / Bundeswehr / P. 7 Kazda / Bundeswehr / P. 4 Seidenschwanz / Bundeswehr / P. 4, 20 Weinrich / Bundeswehr / P. 4, 7 Wilke / Bundeswehr / P. 12 Additional information is available on the Intemet at www.bmvg.de www.bundeswehr.de

Notice This publication is part of the public relations work of the Federal Ministry of Defense.
It is provided free of charge and is not intended for sale.

35

